I rushed to finish Hillary Clintonx2019;s book, Hard Choices, this week, expecting her to clinch the Democratic Party nomination for president. She did, but I am evermore ambivalent about her and her chances of winning.
Many factors will prove decisive in the November elections, but Clinton continues to suffer from the same shortcomings that cost her the 2008 Democratic Party primaries. 
This is particularly important because in the public mind, the contrast canx2019;t be starker between the same packaged Clinton and the unrestrained Republican nominee Donald Trump. She won the Democratic nomination by mastering the rules of the game; he won the Republican nomination by refusing to play by the traditional rules of the game.
























After claiming Democratic nomination, Clinton turns focus to Trump






But come November, Clinton could still lose the general elections even though shex2019;s running against a populist candidate with x201C;no policy knowledge or workable proposalsx201D;, who managed to alienate so many Latinos, Muslims and African Americans.
Photoshopped candidacy
Hard Choices is a tough read not because itx2019;s a long and exhaustive balance sheet of her tenure as secretary of state, but rather because it is as self-congratulatory as it is self-explanatory. 
She boasts of how her diplomatic intervention prevented x201C;explosive confrontationx201D;; how the team Obama-Clinton was seen as a x201C;diplomatic version of the TV thriller, Starsky and Hutchx201D;; and how she succeeded in lobbying for General Electric to gain multibillion-dollar contracts in Algeria. But therex2019;s little or no serious admission of fault and failure and of lessons learned, and certainly no bold vision for America in the world.

READ MORE:xA0;An introduction to Trumpology

Since it was written with the intention of running again for president x2013; clearly, not a x201C;hard choicex201D; x2013; itx2019;s the kind of book that reveals less than it conceals; peddles instead of explaining. It confirms many of the doubts about Clintonx2019;s authenticity.

Democratic US presidential candidate Hillary Clinton Reuters

Like her book, Clintonx2019;s campaign also projects an image of a scripted and packaged candidacy that contrasts sharply with her Republican opponent. 
Despite his ignorance, Donald Trump has been able to communicate freely, effectively and spontaneously with his base. 
The contrast in their visions for America could not be any sharper, as this Washington Post graphic shows, but it mirrors Americax2019;s own down-the-middle societal and political division. 
What will tip the balance to either side is the contrast between their characters.
Likeability and trust
The Democratic Party primaries have exposed Clintonx2019;s failure to inspire or gain the trust of important segments of the voters, especially the young.

The Democratic Party primaries have exposed Clintonapos;s failure to inspire or gain the trust of important segments of the voters, especially the young.
 


According to The New York Times: x201C;Many in this newest generation of American voters say that they donx2019;t trust her, or that she represents a Washington disconnected from their struggles.x201D;
In order to overcome this deep-seated suspicion about her character, the Clinton-friendly newspaper recommends that Hillary release transcripts of her Wall Street speeches and acknowledge the State Department inspectorx2019;s general claim: that using a private email server for official business was not allowed or encouraged, but she did it anyway, in a misguided effort to protect her privacy.
This might help Clinton regain some credibility among her detractors, Democrats and Independents. But it wonx2019;t suffice to change her image. xA0;
Courage and inclusion
To win the elections, Clinton needs to show how Trumpx2019;s politics of fear is cowardly and un-American: fear of Mexicans, Muslims, illegal immigrants; fear of declining America; and fear of a world that threatens, disrespects and takes advantage of America.

READ MORE:xA0;American democracy is rigged

She says America is great and doesnx2019;t require a Trump to make it x201C;great againx201D;. But to demonstrate that, she needs to embrace the better, more optimistic, aspects of the Obama legacy and incorporate many of the proposals advanced by Bernie Sanders, both domestically and internationally.



She needs to show how fairness, inclusion and diplomacy trump Trumpx2019;s politics of hatred and exclusion, and why building bridges with the world is better than walling America in. 
And she must show real empathy towards working people and struggling youth as they search for their rightful place in Americax2019;s future, and revise her campaign platform accordingly. 
Standing tall
If as the record shows, and bizarre as it may sound, Americans are more likely to elect a taller candidate, the 6ft 3in Trump will have an advantage as he towers over Clinton come pre-election handshakes and debates.xA0; 
But the record also shows that in America being tall pales in comparison to standing tall. The question is: Will Clinton stand taller as she confronts her aggressive, misogynist rival?
Otherwise, the Democrats are bound to repeat their 2000 defeat, when Al Gore, Bill Clintonx2019;s vice president, lost to the macho Texan, George Bush. At the time, more than two million progressive and disillusioned voters went for the Green Party candidate, Ralph Nader.
In other words, Clinton must heed the voices of those who gave Sanders their support in Ohio and other battleground states if shex2019;s to avoid Gorex2019;s fate.
Marwan Bishara is the senior political analyst at Al Jazeera. Follow him on Facebook.
 The views expressed in this article are the authorx2019;s own and do not necessarily reflect Al Jazeerax2019;s editorial policy.
