Twitter Inc said on Tuesday that it had reined in access toxA0;DonaldxA0;TrumpxA0;Jrx2019; s account for 12 hours because a tweet he had posted violated the social media sitex2019;s misinformation policy on COVID-19.
The eldest son of United States PresidentxA0;DonaldxA0;TrumpxA0;had posted a video on Monday of doctors talking about the drug hydroxychloroquine, that was removed by Twitter.
The video was also taken down by Facebook Inc and Alphabet Inc-owned YouTube after racking up millions of views, for breaking their rules on COVID-19 misinformation.
PresidentxA0;TrumpxA0;also retweeted a post late on Monday containing a link to the video and accusing Dr Anthony Fauci, the nationx2019;s top infectious disease expert, and Democrats of suppressing the use of the drug hydroxychloroquine to treat the novel coronavirus.

Twitter has just confirmed that Don Jr. has been suspended or quot;temporarily locked outquot; in Twitterapos;s description for spreading coronavirus misinformation
He wonapos;t be able to tweet, Like or retweet for 12 hours.https://t.co/vCCFmBsfTx
x2014; David Gilbert daithaigilbert July 28, 2020

The tweets shared byxA0;TrumpxA0;were deleted as part of Twitterx2019;s enforcement actions.
Fauci, who directs the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and has worked under six US presidents, said on Tuesday that he has x201C;not been misleading the American public under any circumstancesx201D;.
The US Food and Drug Administration last month revoked its emergency-use authorisation for hydroxychloroquine to treat COVID-19, the illness caused by the novel coronavirus, after several studies cast doubt on its effectiveness.xA0;TrumpxA0;has regularly touted the drug and said he has used it himself.
In the video, the doctors also discounted the need for face masks amid the pandemic.
The White House did not immediately respond to a Reuters request for comment.
























US coronavirus: Florida isolation centres used to shield elderly 2:47






x201C;It is beyond the pale for Twitter to silence someone for sharing the views of medical professionals who happen to dissent with their anti-hydroxychloroquine narrative,x201D; said Andy Surabian, a spokesman for the presidentx2019;s son, after sharing a screenshot that said Twitter had temporarily limited DonaldJTrump Jrx2019; s ability to tweet, retweet or like content.
x201C;We did not suspend the account. The screenshot shared directly says that Twitter required the tweet to be deleted because it violated our rules, and that we would limit some account functionality for 12 hours,x201D; a Twitter spokesman told Reuters.
