United States President Donald Trump said on Monday that he had x201C;terminatedx201D; Defense Secretary Mark Esper, appearing to use his final months in office after his November 3 election defeat to settle scores within his administration.
Trump, who publicly split withxA0;EsperxA0;in recent months over a range of issues, said on Twitter that Christopher Miller, director of the National Counterterrorism Center, will become acting secretary of defense. The Senate would be highly unlikely to confirm any new nominee before Trump leaves office in January.
x201C;MarkxA0;EsperxA0;has been terminated,x201D; Trump said on Twitter. x201C;I am pleased to announce that Christopher C. Miller, the highly respected Director of the National Counterterrorism Center unanimously confirmed by the Senate, will be Acting Secretary of Defense, effective immediately.x201D;

x2026;Chris will do a GREAT job! Mark Esper has been terminated. I would like to thank him for his service.
x2014; Donald J. Trump realDonaldTrump November 9, 2020

The Pentagon had no immediate comment.
Esper had long been preparing for the prospect of his resignation or dismissal following the election, particularly if Trump were to win a second term in office, sources said.
The two men fell out earlier this year when Esper opposed Trumpx2019;s threat to use active duty troops to suppress street protests over racial injustice in the US.
EsperxA0;also disagreed with Trumpx2019;s dismissive attitude toward the NATO alliance, sources said.
Esper angered the president particularly by opposing his threat to use active duty troops to suppress street protests over racial injustice in the US File: Adnan Abidi/ReutersTrump has steadfastly refused to acknowledge his election loss to Democrat Joe Biden, alleging widespread voter fraud without evidence. His campaign team has launched legal challenges in several states.
Trump has had an uneasy relationship with the Pentagon, wherexA0;EsperxA0;and top brass have repeatedly sought to avoid being seen as a political instrument of the Trump administration.
Esperx2019;s predecessor, Jim Mattis, quit in 2018 over policy differences with Trump, including on Syria. Mattis in June criticized Trump as the x201C;first president in my lifetime who does not try to unite the American people x2013; does not even pretend to try. Instead he tries to divide us.x201D;
Like Mattis, Esper also disagreed with Trumpx2019;s dismissive attitude toward the NATO alliance and was wary of Trumpx2019;s inclination to see US military alliances through an explicitly transactional lens even as he backed Trumpx2019;s calls for allies to increase defense spending, sources said.
