It was supposed to be a scene of celebration.
Instead, the Trump campaignx2019;s election night watch party in the White House East Room x2013; with few masks and no social distancing x2013; is being eyed as a potential coronavirus super-spreading event and yet another symbol of President Donald Trumpx2019;s cavalier attitude towards a virus that is ripping across the nation and infecting more than 100,000 people a day.
Ben Carson, the secretary for Housing and Urban Development, is the latest attendee to test positive, a department spokesman confirmed. The event has been under scrutiny since another attendee, the presidentx2019;s chief of staff, Mark Meadows, contracted the virus, which has now killed more than 237,000 people in the US alone.
Ben Carson, the Secretary for Housing and Urban Development, is the latest attendee to test positive File: Kevin Lamarque/ReutersCarsonx2019;s deputy chief of staff Coalter Baker said the secretary x201C;is in good spiritsx201D; and x201C;feels fortunate to have access to effective therapeutics which aid and markedly speed his recoveryx201D;.
Lax approach
The White House has repeatedly refused to say who else has tested positive, even as the virus continued to spread. The latest White House cluster, coming just a month after Trumpx2019;s own diagnosis and hospitalisation, includes a top Trump campaign official, as well as a handful of undisclosed White House staff, officials said.
The White House has been increasingly secretive about outbreaks. Many White House and campaign officials, as well as those who attended the election watch party, were kept in the dark about the diagnoses, unaware until they were disclosed by the press.
That the virus would continue to spread in the White House x2013; even though senior staff and those who come into close contact with the president and vice president are frequently tested x2013; has come as no surprise to public health officials who have baulked at the White Housex2019;s lax approach.
And polls suggest that attitude was a serious drag on the presidentx2019;s re-election bid as voters chose to deny Trump a second term in favour of his Democratic rival, now President-elect Joe Biden.
US Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell leaving the Senate floor File: Ken Cedeno/Reutersx201C;The administration was cavalier about the risks of the virus for themselves and for the country. And thatx2019;s one reason why we have so many cases,x201D; said Dr Joshua Sharfstein, a public health professor at Johns Hopkins Universityx2019;s school of public health.
Even Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has said he has been avoiding the White House since August x201C;because my impression was their approach to how to handle this was different from mine and what I insisted that we do in the Senate, which is to wear a mask and practise social distancing.x201D;
Trump had long claimed, without basis, that the virus was being hyped by Democrats to hurt his re-election chances and would miraculously x201C;disappearx201D; after November 3.
Meadows, in particular, has long tried to play down the severity of the virus. He rarely wore a mask in public, except during the period immediately following Trumpx2019;s infection. At one point, he refused to speak to reporters on Capitol Hill after they requested he wear a mask.
Festive atmosphere
He was again without one during Tuesday eveningx2019;s East Room event, where more than 100 of Trumpx2019;s most loyal supporters, family members and Cabinet secretaries gathered to watch the election results come in and see him deliver what they had hoped would be a victory speech.
Birds flying over the White House at dusk, the day after a presidential election victory was called for former Vice President Joe Biden Erin Scott/ReutersIt was a festive atmosphere, with half-empty glasses of wine and other beverages strewn across cocktail tables in front of news cameras. Meadows, who spent time with Trumpx2019;s family beforehand, was seen working the room, including giving several fist-bumps to those in attendance, before Trump took the stage early on Wednesday morning.
Carson was there, along with Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar x2013; who did wear a mask.
While everyone who attended the East Room event had been tested in advance for the virus, there was no social distancing and minimal mask-wearing.
Earlier that day, Meadows had also accompanied the president to his campaignx2019;s headquarters in Virginia, where Trump received rousing cheers from several dozen staff and volunteers. Meadows did not wear a mask, nor did other White House staffers. Campaign aides largely did.
If Meadows tested positive Wednesday x2013; as Bloomberg News reported x2013; he would likely have been infectious during both events, said Saskia Popescu, an epidemiologist who teaches at George Mason University.
Meadows had also travelled with Trump in the run-up to Election Day, attending dozens of rallies where he was frequently seen interacting with supporters without masks.
Trumpx2019;s refusal to abide by his own governmentx2019;s public health guidelines throughout the campaign was a major source of frustration for local governments as he scheduled rally after rally in defiance of local caps on crowd sizes, even in pandemic hot zones.
While Trump had hoped his efforts to downplay the virus in a bid to revive a limping economy would help him with voters, many Republicans now believe that Trump might have won re-election had he handled things differently.
Still, Trumpx2019;s approach reflected the priorities of his supporters. AP VoteCast, a national survey of the electorate, found that about half of Trump voters called the economy and jobs the top issue facing the nation, versus just one in 10 Biden voters. A majority of Biden voters, meanwhile x2013; about six in 10 x2013; said the pandemic was the most important issue facing the country.
x2018;A ripe environment for transmissionx2019;
The White House did not respond to specific questions about the current outbreak, but said that contact tracing had been conducted by the White House Medical Unit, consistent with Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines.
x201C;Appropriate notifications and recommendations have been made,x201D; the White House said.
The CDC defines x201C;close contactx201D; as spending at least 15 minutes within six feet of an infected person beginning two days before they test positive or exhibit symptoms.
White House Chief of Staff Mark Meadows speaking to the media after US President Donald Trump announced that he and US First Lady Melania Trump have both tested positive for the coronavirus diseasexA0; in Washington, DC, US File: Joshua Roberts/ReutersBut Popescu called the party, in particular, x201C;a ripe environment for transmission to occur,x201D; and said anyone in attendance should have been informed and asked to take precautions.
x201C;While they might not meet CDC guidelines for exposure, I think when wex2019;re looking at an indoor event with a lot of people for a prolonged period who are unmasked, out of an abundance of caution, everyone should be notified and encouraged to stay home,x201D; she said.
x201C;Now is not the time to be cavalier about the risks,x201D; Sharfstein said.
Ohio pastor Darrell Scott, a close ally of the president who attended the party, said he was unaware any White House officials beyond Meadows had tested positive until informed by a reporter and had not been contacted by any tracer.
While Scott, like many in Trumpx2019;s orbit, continued to insist fraud was to blame for the presidentx2019;s loss x2013; despite no credible evidence supporting those claims x2013; he also blamed Trump for several x201C;unforced errorsx201D; during the campaign, including the way he talked about the virus.
x201C;I canx2019;t be upset if we shoot ourselves in the foot,x201D; he said.
The latest outbreak came less than two weeks after several aides to Vice President Mike Pence, including his chief of staff, tested positive for the virus. And it came a month after Trump, First Lady Melania Trump and at least two dozen others tested positive after Trump held large gatherings of people not wearing facemasks, including the ceremony announcing the nomination of Judge Amy Coney Barrett to the Supreme Court.
