Egyptx2019;s President Mohamed MorsixA0;has pardoned all political prisoners detained since thexA0;start of protests that toppled Hosni Mubarak last year.
The pardon covers citizens facing trial and those servingxA0;jail sentences except for those convicted of murder, thexA0;presidential spokesman said on Monday, but did not give a specific numberxA0;for the pardoned prisoners.
Activists have said that thousands of civilians ended up inxA0;army courts in the security vacuum that followed the fall ofxA0;Mubarak in 2011. The campaign group, No to Military Trials, said at least 5,000 political prisoners were still in jail.
The move by Morsi was long demanded by Egyptx2019;s youth groups behind the uprising.
Many of those jailed were arrested in the protests thatxA0;erupted during the 18 months an interim military government wasxA0;in charge in Egypt under the leadership of Field Marshal HusseinxA0;Tantawi.
Some prisoners have even been tried since Morsi tookxA0;office in June. Those already convicted for their role in the protests may also be pardoned.
Mohammed Gadallah, Morsix2019;s legal advisor, said the decree is x201C;one of the revolutionx2019;s most important victoriesx201D;.
x201C;It shows the revolution is now in power and guides the decision-making,x201D; Gadallah said.
x201C;This is a legislation that protects the revolutionaries.x201D;
List of names
The decree asks the prosecutor general and the military prosecutor to prepare a list of names of those who may benefit from the pardon.
The first article of the decree, which was published on Morsix2019;s official Facebook page, orders a x201C;comprehensive pardon for crimes and misdemeanors or attempts to commit them in support of the revolution and the realization ofits goalsx201D;.
The only suspects exempted from the decree are those charged with premeditated murder over that time period.
Gadallah said the decree is likely to cover all major court cases where protesters clashed with military troops and security forces.
Another human rights lawyer, Ahmed Ragheb, praised Morsix2019;s decree but said it doesnx2019;t include x201C;all the victims of the past periodx201D;.
Protesters currently on trial face charges ranging from resisting authorities, damaging public or private property or disrupting public order.
More than a 12,000 civilians have been brought before military tribunals, many of them on charges such as x201C;thuggeryx201D;.
It will be up to the prosecutor general and the military prosecutor to name those who will be pardoned. Suspects who are excluded can challenge the decision, and a judicial panel would be the final arbiter.
Morsi, who hails from the Muslim Brotherhood, said onxA0;Saturday he had fallen short of goals he promised to fulfil inxA0;his first 100 days in office.
