An Egyptian court has dissolved the former ruling National Democratic Party NDP and ordered its funds and property to be handed over to the government.
The Higher Administrative Court issued the order on Saturday, meeting one of the key demands of the protest movement that ousted former president Hosni Mubarak in February.xA0;
x201C;The administrative court issued a ruling to dissolve the NDP and seize its money, and its headquarters and buildings will be handed to the government,x201D; a judicial source said.
Lawyers had raised a suit demanding the partyx2019;s dissolution, accusing it of corruption.
The NDP dominated Egyptian politics since it was set up by Mubarakx2019;s predecessor, Anwar el-Sadat, in 1978.
Much of its senior leadership is now behind bars on suspicion of embezzlement.
Rebranding efforts
Al Jazeerax2019;s Zeina Khodr, reporting from Cairo, said that to the protesters the NDP symbolises people who had misused their excessive powers.
However, she said there had been efforts recentlyxA0;to rebrand the party: x201C;The new secretary-general is Talat el-Sadat, an outspoken opposition figure andxA0;nephew of Anwar el-Sadat.
x201C;Therex2019;s a statement coming out from the new figures in the party which is now to be called the New National Party. What theyx2019;re saying is that theyx2019;re going to rid the party of corrupt officials and that there were some honest people who would run as independents but had no other choice but to join the party because of the situation in the country.x201D;
The move to dissolve NDP was the latest concession by Egyptx2019;s military rulers to demands of the protest movement, coming days afterxA0;Mubarak and his sons were put under detention for investigation on allegations of corruption and involvement in the killing of protesters.
Protesters had suspected that the party couldxA0;have becomexA0;a powerful contender in the first post-Mubarak parliament elections due in September.
The partyx2019;s headquarters were torched during the protests that led Mubarak to step down, and its supporters were blamed forxA0;attacking pro-democracy demonstrations.
