





Mubarak hasxA0;offeredxA0;political reformsxA0;in a bid to end the protests around the country Reuters



The Egyptian government is reported to have freed 34 political prisoners, including some members ofxA0;the Muslim Brotherhood,xA0;in a move seen to be part of promisedxA0;reforms aimed at ending anti-government protests.
According to Al Jazeera sources,xA0;more thanxA0;a thousand otherxA0;prisoners were released on Wednesday after completing at least three-quarters of their sentences. And another 840 priosoners were released from the Sinai province.
x201C;Interior Minister Mahmoud Wagdy issued an order today releasing 34 political detainees considered to be among the extremist elements, after evaluating their positions,x201D; the state-owned Middle East News Agency MENA said on Tuesday.
x201C;They showed good intentions and expressed their desire to live peaceably with society.x201D;
The report added they had handed themselves over to the authorities after escaping from prison during several days of disorder last month.
Security forces were withdrawn from the streets after failing to crush millions of protesters on January 28. Security then broke down at many prisons around the country.
During the 1990s, Egypt battled Islamist fighters who wanted to replacexA0;the government of Hosni Mubarak, the president, with an Islamic state.
Political detainees
Many fighters remain in jail from the time of Mubarakx2019;s predecessor Anwar Sadat, who was assassinated by soldiers linked to an Islamist group in 1981.
According to human rights groups, it is not clear how many people are detained in Egypt for political activities, such as joining banned groups or planning or carrying out acts of violence, but they estimate them to be in thousands.
Mubarak has offered other concessions in an attempt to end ongoing protests around the country, which included the appointment of a vice-president and a new cabinet.
Political reforms have also been pledged and the government said this would include freeing detainees and lifting emergency laws.
