An Egyptian court has ordered an end toxA0;the state of emergency, two days ahead of schedule and three months after it was imposed during a crackdown onxA0;protesters supporting ousted President Mohamed Morsi.
The cabinet said in a statement it would respect the ruling but would wait for official notification from the court before implementing it.
The state of emergency, accompanied by a night time curfew, had been scheduled to expire on Thursday.
ItxA0;was imposed after a deadly crackdown by security forces on protest camps set up by supporters of Morsi, who was overthrown by the military on July 3 following mass rallies against his rule.
The state of the emergency allowed the authorities to make arrests without warrants and gave security officials the right to search peoplex2019;s homes.
The end of the state of emergency would mean the end of the 01:00-05:00xA0;curfew also inxA0;place.
Al Jazeerax2019;s Rory Challands, in Cairo, said military officialsxA0;there said they had not yet received an executive order to lift the curfew.
x201C;They said they have to hear something from the prime minister before they lift it,x201D; our correspondent said.
Ongoing protests
The court decision comes despite the continued protests in different parts of the country.
On Tuesday,xA0;student supporters of Morsi rallied at the university in the Nile Delta town of Mansoura. Police fired tear gasxA0;to dispersexA0;protesters, witnesses said.
Egypt has seen a wave ofxA0;demonstrations and violence since the army-led overthrow of Morsi.
Hundreds have been killed, mostly Morsi supporters, as well as about 100xA0;security officers.
Morsi has been held in a secret location since his removal, andxA0;was transferred to a high-security prison in the Mediterranean port city ofxA0;Alexandria after the opening session of his trial on November 4.
He has so farxA0;declined legal representation andxA0;wanted to defend himself.
Morsix2019;s son saidxA0;his fatherxA0;wasxA0;meeting on TuesdayxA0;with a team of lawyers who sought to defend him in his ongoing trial onxA0;charges of inciting murder.
The deposed leader, who has not yet agreed toxA0;let the team represent him, wanted to discuss with them taking legal actionxA0;against others, his son said.
