The conservative-majority US Supreme Court on Tuesday dives back into politically perilous waters as it hears arguments over a Republican challenge backed by President Donald Trumpx2019;s administration aiming to invalidate the Obamacare healthcare law.
President-elect Joe Biden has criticised Republican efforts to throw out the Affordable Care Act ACA, as the law is formally known, in the midst of a deadly coronavirus pandemic and hopes to buttress Obamacare after taking office on January 20.
The case represents the latest Republican legal attack on the 2010xA0;law, which was the signature domestic policy achievement of Democratic former President Barack Obama, under whom Biden served as vice president.















The Supreme Court has a 6-3 conservative majority after the Republican-led Senate last month confirmed US President Donald Trumpx2019;s third appointee, Amy Coney Barrett. Most legal experts think the justices will stop short of a seismic ruling striking downxA0;Obamacare. ThexA0;SupremexA0;CourtxA0;in 2012 and 2015 fended off previous Republican challenges to it.
President-elect Joe Biden is scheduled to deliver a speech on the Affordable Care Act ACA on Tuesday.
His speech reflects the importance he is putting on healthcare as he prepares to take office in January amid the worst pandemic in more than a century. He is launching his transition process this week as the coronavirus surges across the country. The US surpassed 10 million cases on Monday.
Republican-governed states led by Texas, later backed by Trumpx2019;s administration, sued in 2018 in Texas to strike down thexA0;law. The justices are due to hear 80 minutes of arguments by teleconference in an appeal by a coalition of Democratic-led states including California and New York and the Democratic-led House of Representatives to preservexA0;Obamacare.
President-elect Joe Biden speaking in Wilmington, Delaware Paul Sancya/AP PhotoIf Obamacare were to be struck down, up to 20 million Americans could lose medical insurance and insurers could once again refuse to cover people with pre-existing medical conditions. Obamacare expanded public healthcare programmes and created marketplaces for private insurance.
x201C;We believe there are nine justices who connect the dots and see how important this is,x201D; said California Attorney General Xavier Becerra, a Democrat who is leading the coalition of 20 states defendingxA0;Obamacare.
x201C;We think therex2019;s a very strong chance that Americans will continue to have good healthcare coverage,x201D; Becerra added.
US Congressional Democrats outside the US Capitol in Washington, DC displaying pictures of Americans they claim x2018;would be hurtx2019; if the Affordable Care Act is struck down File: Jonathan Ernst/ReutersTexas-based US District Court Judge Reed Ox2019;Connor in 2018 ruled that Obamacare was unconstitutional as currently structured in light of a Republican-backed change made by Congress a year earlier.
The New Orleans-based 5th US Circuit Court of Appeals last year partially upheld that ruling, saying the lawx2019;s x201C;individual mandatex201D;, which required people to obtain insurance or pay a financial penalty, afoul of the Constitution. But the 5th Circuit stopped short of striking down the law. The Democratic-led states and the House then appealed to the Supreme Court.
The 2012xA0;SupremexA0;CourtxA0;ruling upheld mostxA0;ObamacarexA0;provisions including the individual mandate. ThexA0;courtxA0;defined this penalty as a tax and thus found thexA0;lawxA0;permissible under the Constitutionx2019;s provision empowering Congress to levy taxes.
In 2017, Trump signed axA0;lawxA0;that eliminated the financial penalty under the individual mandate, which gave rise to the RepublicanxA0;lawsuit. With that change, the individual mandate could no longer be interpreted as a tax provision and was therefore unlawful, the Republican challengers argued.
