They came by the thousands, roughly 5,500 by most estimates, to stand under the bright mid-day sun to listen to the woman who hopes to make history by becoming the first female president of the United States in 2016.
Hillary Clinton is a familiar face to most Americans who remember her as a First Lady, and later as a senator for the State of New York, and even as a presidential candidate, running against Barack Obama in 2008 for the Democratic nomination. Now, Clinton once again has set her sights on the White House.
Clinton used, what her campaign called a x201C;launch rallyx201D; on Roosevelt Island, in New York, to conjure up images of President Franklin Roosevelt, who helped lift millions of Americans from poverty after the Great Depression.
The former secretary of state told her supporters she would build upon many of the ideas of Roosevelt, if elected president. Her speech focused heavily on domestic policy touching on issues of income inequality and how she hoped to lift Americax2019;s working and middle class workers though increased wages and equal pay for men and women.
She told the cheering crowds that US tax policies currently favour the wealthiest Americans like the CEOs of corporations, and that she believed all Americans deserve a chance at prosperity.
Needs of the middle class
She worked hard to convince those listening, that despite the fact that shex2019;s received millions of dollars for speaking fees in recent months, shex2019;s still in touch with the needs of the middle class. Repeatedly, Clinton reminded the audience she came from modest roots where her mother was abandoned as a child and her grandfather worked for decades in a Scranton, Pennsylvania factory. She says their hard work and triumph over adversity is what still inspires her.
Although Clintonx2019;s speech was intended mostly for a domestic audience, there were fleeting moments of foreign policy. She told her audience she has, as a former secretary of state already, x201C;stood up to adversaries like Putinx201D; referencing Russian President Vladimir Putin.
She also said that the US is x201C;better preparedx201D; to confront x201C;emerging threatsx201D; like the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant or ISIL, as well as cyber-security threats that continue to attack the United States.
On these sensitive foreign policy issues, however, there was little detail other than Clinton stating that if she was in the White House, she would x201C;do whatever it takes to keep Americans safex201D;. In terms of foreign policy strategy the speech was thin. It was clear Clinton was targeting her message to a domestic audience and those she believes she can win over as potential voters.
Inclusive policy
Even though Clinton is a former First Lady of the United States, the rally did not involve former President Bill Clinton in a significant way. She only referenced her husband a few times x2013; once while mentioning to the crowds that shex2019;s seen first hand x201C;how hard this job isx201D;. The former president, however, was in attendance, and did join his wife on stage at the end of her speech, much to the joy of those in attendance.
The appearance of the two Clintons, side by side, was a reminder of just how different the husband and wife team are as politicians. I covered Bill Clinton when I first arrived as a Canadian reporter in the United States, back in 1998. Bill Clinton has always had a spontaneous and energetic style when speaking in public.
In contrast, Hillary Clinton appeared stilted in her speech delivery. It was a flawless performance, but it lacked the energy of a more unscripted event. It was obvious Clinton had rehearsed her speech, and its x201C;punchlinesx201D;, many, many times.
Still, Clinton supporters seemed to enjoy the rally. Those I spoke to leaving the speech said they were satisfied by what they heard. Many told me they felt she x201C;spoke to all Americansx201D; and was x201C;inclusivex201D;. Others said they looked forward to x201C;hearing more from Hillaryx201D; as she campaigns in the coming months.
They will get that opportunity. Clinton heads next to the US states of Iowa, New Hampshire, Nevada, and South Carolina where her campaign says she will hold x201C;organising partiesx201D; to share her ideas face to face with small groups of potential voters. They are voters the campaign says Clinton will work hard to win over in her quest for the White House.
