As the presidential election campaigns in the United States draw to a close, amid President Donald Trumpx2019;s often belligerent and divisive actions, Joe Biden, the Democratic Party candidate, is being projected as Americax2019;s x2013; and the worldx2019;s x2013; last hope.
This is hardly surprising, as Trumpx2019;s re-election campaign has served up a fantastic constellation of distortions about American x201C;valuesx201D; that would certainly sit well in Gone With The Wind, the award-winning classic American film that espoused the x201C;splendourx201D; of slavery and white supremacy. Moreover, his brash proclamations about x201C;making America great againx201D; led to unprecedented polarisation and a cacophony of ominous calls for conservative America to stand up to x201C;leftistx201D; forces allegedly bent on destroying the worldx2019;s greatest nation.
Attorney General William P Barr has described Americax2019;s liberals as intent on x201C;tearing down the systemx201D; and x201C;fascisticx201D;. Kay Cole James, a leading conservative who served in George W Bushx2019;s administration, claimed: x201C;Antifa and the BLM organization want to impose an ideology on America that would only bring greater poverty, a loss of freedom, destruction to churches and civil society, and violent law enforcement tactics to enforce compliance x2013; exactly what wex2019;ve seen in places like Venezuela, Cuba and North Korea.x201D;
After convincing his supporters that America needs x201C;savingx201D;, the president took on the role of a dashing white saviour with John Wayne patriotism and Clark Gable flair, and promised Americans that he would continue to protect them from all of their imagined enemies x2013; from anti-fascist protesters and anti-racism activists to immigrants and the x201C;Chinese virusx201D;.
As Trump worked hard to sell himself as the leader America needs to return to its former glory, Biden cast himself as the antithesis of the madman in the White House.
Doing so, to be honest, has not been incredibly hard x2013; all Biden had to do was to promise to repeal the racist, conservative and isolationist policies Trump has established in the last four years, especially in foreign affairs.
The most intriguing statement of intent promoted by Biden lately is a promise to end Trumpx2019;s unqualified support for Saudi Arabia. The oil-rich nation has been accused of committing war crimes in Yemen and orchestrating the assassination of Saudi journalist Jamal Khashoggi in Turkey. In a statement released on the second anniversary of Khashoggix2019;s killing, Biden pledged to x201C;end US support for Saudi Arabiax2019;s war in Yemen, and make sure America does not check its values at the door to sell arms or buy oil.x201D;
He went as far as to claim that under a BidenxA0;presidency, x201C;Americax2019;s commitment to democratic values and human rights will be a priority, even with our closest security partners. I will defend the right of activists, political dissidents, and journalists around the world to speak their minds freely without fear of persecution and violence.x201D;
This extraordinary, and frankly dubious, commitment chimes well with Bidenx2019;s promise to re-establish the position of the US, whose credibility he believes was x201C;tarnishedx201D; by the Trump presidency, as a just and trusted global leader. Essentially, Biden wants to bring back Bill Clinton, George W Bush and Barack Obamax2019;s America: an ostensibly strong, righteous and benevolent America that is a force for good across the world.
The America that, he so proudly claims, provided x201C;moral leadershipx201D; to the world.
The problem is, such an America just does not exist.
In fact, it never did x2013; not under Clinton, Bush or Obama.
And America has never enjoyed any discernible x201C;credibilityx201D;.
Believing Biden when he says he cares about human rights in Saudi Arabia and Yemen would require us to also believe that he understands the plight of the civilian populations carelessly bombed, maimed and killed by American and allied forces in Iraq, Afghanistan and Syria. That he did not agree with John Kerry when he described the Egyptian militaryx2019;s coup against the countryx2019;s democratically elected president as x201C;restoring democracyx201D;. That he has defended the civil rights activists, journalists and protesters detained, harassed and killed by American-backed security forces in Egypt. That his heart has bled for the thousands of Palestinians killed by Israeli security forces in the last 10 years. That he publicly disagreed with Obama when in 2014, as Palestinian civilians in Gaza were being slaughtered by relentless Israeli air attacks, he declared that x201C;Israel has a right to defend itselfx201D;.
But he has not. Instead, throughout his decades-long political career, Biden has consistently toed the American line; he supported Israelx2019;s apartheid, Egyptx2019;s assaults on human rights and civil liberties, and Saudi Arabiax2019;s murderous policies.
Worse still, Biden never raised any opposition to the American Service-Membersx2019; Protection Act. Signed into law by Bush in 2002, it is a US federal law that aims x201C;to protect United States military personnel and other elected and appointed officials of the United States government against criminal prosecution by an international criminal court to which the United States is not party.x201D;
It allows the US president to use x201C;all means necessary and appropriate to bring about the release of any US or allied personnel being detained or imprisoned by, on behalf of, or at the request of the International Criminal Court ICCx201D;. In June, the Trump administration imposed economic and travel sanctions on ICC workers directly involved in investigating American troops and intelligence officials and those of allied nations, including Israel, for possible war crimes in Afghanistan andxA0;elsewhere.
The ICC has been investigating possible war crimes committed by US troops in Afghanistan and Israeli troops in Palestine. Crucially, Biden has not stated a burning desire to revoke this regressive and counterproductive act. He never lobbied the US Congress and Senate to repeal the American Service-Membersx2019; Protection Act when he was vice president, and he has no intention to do so if he is elected president in November. He does not want to stand up for international justice, or the thousands of people unfairly tortured and killed by American and allied troops.
And he does not want America to stop conducting drone attacks x2013; extrajudicial killings that are sold as essential components of a x201C;comprehensive counterterrorism strategyx201D;.
All in all, this supposedly progressive presidential candidate x2013; just like his x201C;America firstx201D; rival x2013; wants America and its allies to inflict x201C;greater poverty, a loss of freedom, destruction to churches and civil society, and violent law enforcement tactics to enforce compliancex201D; in third world countries, but avoid being investigated and facing accountability for its endless transgressions of international law. He wants America to continue inflicting violence on the world, but be praised as a moral and just global leader for doing so.
So why is America lost in this shameless spectacle about values, greatness, moral leadership and credibility, when it clearly has none? It is understandable that Americax2019;s number one objective in foreign affairs is Americax2019;s wellbeing, seemingly at any cost. But why does it pretend to care about being perceived as axA0; protector of peace and democracy around the world, when it has long sponsored, backed and initiated political insurgencies, military coups and repressive regimes in SouthxA0;America, Africa and the MiddlexA0;East?
It could go about funding murderous strongmen and destroying lives abroad without seeking moral cover and undue global validation for its violent actions, but it does not. Instead, every four years, without fail, it indulges in an embarrassing song and dance about advancing or restoring Americax2019;s leadership on the world stage and, as Biden puts it, leading through the x201C;power of examplex201D;. Yet history tells us that neither the Republicans nor Democrats have ever really made the world a safer place. And even now, with Trump in office, the presidential election, whatever the result, will not make America more moral or just.
America, under Biden, will be as dangerous as ever.
The views expressed in this article are the authorx2019;s own and do not necessarily reflect Al Jazeerax2019;s editorial stance.
