





Head of Egyptx2019;s ruling military council, Hussein Tantawi, served as defence minister under Hosni MubarakxA0;EPA



Egyptx2019;s ruling military council head has testified in the trial of Hosni Mubarak in a hearing that could decide the fate of the ex-president accused of responsibility for the deaths of hundreds of demonstrators earlier this year.
Field Marshal Hussein Tantawi arrived under military escort on Saturday morning at the heavily guarded courtroom in Cairo for the nearly hour-long testimony, which is under a complete media blackout. Mubarak was present in the courtroom during Tantawix2019;s testimony, lying on a gurney inside the defendantsx2019; cage.


Tantawi, who was defence minister for two decades, could provide critical insight into Mubarakx2019;s alleged role in the deaths of nearly 850 protesters as well as insider revelations about the former regimex2019;s final days.
The trial is also seen as a test between Egyptx2019;s traditional power structure and the impatience for clear breaks with the past, seven months after Mubarak was toppled in February and power shifted to a military council headed by Tantawi.
As Tantawi testified, dozens of activists and families of slain protesters rallied outside the court, chanting, x201C;Tantawi, tell the truth, is Mubarak a killer or not,x201D; as they waved pictures of those killed in the uprising.
A group of pro-Mubarak supporters also rallied outside the courtroom, separated from the families of the slain protesters by anti-riot police and army troops.
x2018;Decisivex2019;xA0;testimony
Gomaa Ali, a lawyer representing the family of 17-year-old slain protester Mohammed Abdel Gawad, said he expected Tantawix2019;s testimony to be x201C;decisive in convicting Mubarakx201D; because he was part of the former presidentx2019;s inner circle.
x201C;He was inside the operation room, behind the closed doors all during the days of the revolution. He knows all the secrets,x201D; said Ali.
Tantawi was initially set to testify on September 11, but failed to attend the session citing a busy schedule and instead offering to submit a written testimony. The development at the time raised suspicions of hesitation by Mubarakx2019;s former allies to face him in court and possibly shed embarrassing secrets.
But the judge summoned Tantawi again and he agreed to appear at Saturdayx2019;s hearing.
The trial depends heavily on accounts of members of the former presidentx2019;s inner circle who testified last week. Among those who testified was spy chief Omar Sueliman, who was appointed vice president by Mubarak during the uprising.
Egyptx2019;s Chief of Staff Sami Anan x2013; the second highest-ranking figure on the military council x2013; is expected to testify on Sunday.
The lawyers of victimsx2019; families had demanded Tantawi testify because he had publicly suggested the army rejected the use of force against protesters.
Addressing a graduation ceremony of police cadets in May, Tantawi said the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces convened in the middle of the uprising and decided not to open fire at the protesters. But he didnx2019;t elaborate on who gave the orders for security forces to turn their weapons against protesters.
