The youngest son of late Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi died of an alleged heart attack at a hospital in Cairo, sources told Al Jazeera.
Abdullah Morsi, who was in his mid-twenties, died on Wednesday at the Oasis hospital in Giza in the southwest of the capital, the sources said.
A Morsi family source confirmed his death to Anadolu Agency without giving further details.
Egyptx2018;s health ministry has yet to comment on his death.
Mohamed Morsi, Egyptx2019;s first democratically elected president, died on June 17 while standing trial for charges that he and legal observers said were politically motivated.
He was deposed in a 2013 military coup carried out by current President Abdel-Fattah el-Sisi following a year in power.
Several local news sites reported the death of Abdullah Morsi, saying there was no criminal suspicion, noting that Morsix2019;s son had suffered several previous health scares, and was saddened by his fatherx2019;s death.
Morsix2019;s second son, Ahmed, said his younger brother, Abdullah, was driving his car and had sudden spasms. He was immediately taken to hospital but doctors were unable to revive him.
x201C;Abdullah died at the hospital after suffering a heart attack,x201D; Anadolu cited Ahmed Morsi as saying.
Outspoken critic
Abdullah Morsi had been imprisoned several times in recent years. He had been accused and acquitted of drug use, in a case involving allegations that he and legal observers said were fabricated.
Among Morsix2019;s children, Abdullah was the most outspoken critic of the Egyptian government. He was also the most supportive of his father and his defence during his trial and stay in prison.
In a Twitter post after his fatherx2019;s death, Abdullah accused a number of Egyptian officials whom he called x201C;partnersx201D; of el-Sisi x201C;in killing the martyr presidentx201D;.
He particularly accused incumbent and former interior ministers Mahmoud Tawfiq and Magdy Abdel Ghaffar, respectively.
At the time of his death, Morsi x2013; a leading member of Egyptx2019;s Muslim Brotherhood who won the countryx2019;s presidential election in 2012 x2013; faced a host of legal charges, which he, along with various human rights groups and independent observers, said were politically motivated.
