x201C;No regime, ever since the Pharaohs, has been elected in Egypt, so we want to push the Egyptian people to decide their own fate,x201D; Abdullah al-Ashaal said.
Al-Ashaal, 65, said that he was planning to seek the support of an opposition party to enable him to challenge what he calls the monopolisation of power by Mubarak, the president for the nearly 29 years.



in depth











xA0;
Profile: Mohamed ElBaradei


xA0;
Video: Egypt welcomes ElBaradei home


xA0;
ElBaradei urges Egyptian reforms


xA0;
Profile: Hosni Mubarak


xA0;
Egypt activists rebuke constitution







x201C;This is a big shift, not only to reform but also to make the historic step that Egyptians should vote to choose their ruler.x201D;
Al-Ashaal said he was speaking to several parties about joining them, but was particularly looking to the Arab Socialist Party.
The former Egyptian ambassador to Saudi Arabia criticised a clause in the constitution which the opposition says restricts theirxA0;ability to field candidatesxA0;for the presidency and makes it almost impossible for independents to run.xA0;
x201C;We need to get the confidence of the Egyptian citizens and be sure that his vote is the only criteria to change the situation in Egypt,x201D;al-Ashaal said.
x201C;Even if the ruling party comes back through transparent elections we will welcome that, but the problem is that the Egyptians are barred from changing anything in Egypt.x201D;
FamilyxA0;future 
Mubarak, who easily wonxA0;the countryx2019;s first multi-candidate presidential election in 2005, has not said if he will seek another term in the 2011 election. 
ButxA0;if he chooses not to run,xA0;many Egyptians believe he will try to hand power to his son, Gamal, 46. Both men have denied thatxA0;this is the plan.
Mohamed ElBaradei, the former head of the International Atomic Energy Agency,xA0;has already shaken up the countryx2019;s political scene by saying he might seek the presidency.
ButxA0;he has demanded that a number of conditions,xA0;including changes to the constitution allowing independents to stand for office, are met before he will make his move.






ElBaradeixA0;shook up Egyptx2019;s political scene by saying he might seek thexA0;presidencyxA0;Reuters



ElBaradei has ruled out seeking any partyx2019;s backing for a possible presidential bid.
Even with the support of an opposition party, the chances for success are limited in a country dominated for decades by Mubarakx2019;s National Democratic Party. 
To stand in an election the candidate must have held a senior party post for a year before the vote.
Al-Ashaal hasxA0;echoedxA0;a call made by other opposition figures, including ElBaradei, for an endxA0;to thexA0;emergency law that allows indefinite detentions.
Critics say the law, which has been in placexA0;since the assassination of President Anwar Sadat in 1981, is used to crackdown on dissent.
Ayman Nour, who came a distant second to Mubarak in 2005, has also said thatxA0;he wants to run again next year. 
A conviction for forgery, which he says was politically-motivated, is likely to prevent him from taking part.
