July 27, 2013 will go down in the annals of history as an infamous day not dissimilar to June 4, 1989, when the Chinese government used disproportionate force in Tiananmen Square, snuffing out a peaceful protest with violence.
There is one major difference though. The overkill tactics used against tens of thousands of ousted president Mohamed Morsi supporters staging an open sit-in protest inxA0;Nasr City is not over. Since early July, they have been camping outside a mosque and a barracks in that area to demand Morsix2019;s reinstatement.
Interior Minister Mohamed Ibrahim and General Abdel Fattah El Sisix2019;s vow to end the sit-in has targeted an emboldened and measurable segment of Egyptx2019;s political and civil societies that have thus far refused to blink.
The army has twice miscalculated x2013; and may even have duped its political partners: The first miscalculation was calling for their endorsement to forcibly oust Morsi. The second was creating a public x201C;mandatex201D; for soldiers to fight so-called terrorism in other words, x201C;local militiasx201D;.
After the latest massacre, many people around the world will be inevitably and understandably asking questions not only about the immorality and illegality of what has happened, but also about whether the serious killings of more than a hundred protesters qualifies as x201C;state terrorismx201D;.
 Soldier or politician? 
So is Sisi a soldier or a politician? At this point, it doesnx2019;t really matter anymore. Military skill aside, hisxA0;credibility and judgement in either field is now in doubt after yesterdayx2019;s massacre.
Less than a month ago, General Sisi, was a professional soldier wearing his badges with deserved pride. Since his tamarrod -backed coup, he is x2013; at least in the eyes of the Muslim Brotherhood and other Islamist groupsx2019; supporters x2013; someone whose hands are now tainted with blood and his career is, as a result, tattered by the crude use of brute force against civilians.























Egypt suffers night of deadly violence





Those who had any doubt about Egyptx2019;s putsch should not wait for more deaths to either give x201C;democracy a second chancex201D;xA0;or establish beyond reasonable doubt that what had actually happened on July 3 was a coup. Regardless though, coup or no coup, what happened in Nasr City xA0; was a massacre.
Sooner or later, Sisi and friends will fail. In fact, they have failed from day one, and ElBaradei x2013; once a hero who spoke out courageously for a democratic constitution and institution-building x2013; can no longer look the other way. The Democratic Alliance and he are guilty by association. Rule via use of force against civilians only hastens the unravelling of the post-Morsi order.
No amount of media spin by Egyptx2019;s military-controlled TV and radio will cover up the killings. Sooner or later journalists with integrity, both Egyptian and foreign, will sift myth from reality about yesterdayx2019;s killings.
 Sisix2019;s miscalculation 
Egyptx2019;s top general seems to think like a relic from Mubarakx2019;s closet. One wonders where he has been in the past two years: Egyptians of all walks of life have transcended the threshold of fear. There is no winding back the clock to the republics of fear x2013; as Makiya aptly called Saddamx2019;s security-state. Time and time again, people continue to show willingness to die for strong and passionate belief in dignity and freedom x2013; secularists, Islamists, youth, and liberals, etc.
When millions were vocalising x201D; degage x201D; and x201D; irhal x201D; x201C;leavex201D; or x201C;get outx201D;, they were in fact collectively exorcising the demons that lived within them, holding them captives to the brutal machineries of Arab askar army and security services x2013;xA0; mukhabarat . They were shouting irhal not only to oust the mortals who expected a culture of obedience, but also against their most inner fear of the security state. In the Arab squares, waves of humans staged public rituals cleansing souls from the one feeling that reduced citizens into denizens, humans into sub-humans and compatriots into morbid enemies snitching on one another out of fear x2013; and rarely out of loyalty.
In Egypt, every massacre x2013; and they are multiplying in numbers and gravity x2013; hardens and emboldens the fearless side in whose eyes legitimacy still rests with Morsi. Actually, Sisi seems to be pitied, not feared. In less than one month x2013; to reiterate a previous point x2013; he has turned himself into a recklessly trigger-happy general.
In so doing, he may also be undermining Egyptx2019;s security x2013; the one thing that seems to be the drive behind his actions as the words x201C;terrorismx201D; and x201C;terroristsx201D;, in reference to Islamists, return to the public domain with regular frequency.























Muslim Brotherhood demands probe of Egypt x2018;massacrex2019;





The second miscalculation is that Sisi has executed a coup on behalf of a one-sided cause and segment, adding to polarisation and mutual distrust and hatred pitting Islamist against secularist.
From day one, Egyptx2019;s top general seemed to slip deep down into the slippery slope of infilat loss of control in political and security terms. In blunt language, Sisix2019;s actions so far point to someone who has lost the plot. Everything he does or does not do will from now on, and more often than not, produce consequences not of his choosing. He is however legally responsible for the results of how much force he sanctions, when and where, and what effect. The results are his but not the consequences: the rage, the indignation, the condemnation, the harm to his armyx2019;s and his own standing!
It is doubtful whether there is a containment mode or an exit policy: one cannot simply erase crimes against civilians or dismiss them as x201C;necessaryx201D; -Tony Blairx2019;s wording in reference to the coup. Not in todayx2019;s world, and not after January 25, 2011.
One could sense that the end is nigh when the top soldier goes to the public asking for a march against terrorism! He did not manage more than thousands in Tahrir Square answering his call. And although he wanted a march endorsing his call, he unleashed his troops on the pro-Morsi march that reminds him daily of his coup.
Did the peaceful protesters in Nasr City epitomise the x201C;terroristsx201D; which Sisi had in mind when he asked Egyptians to empower him to fight? How democratic!
 Egypt: Revolutionaries without a revolution? 
Egypt once again, under hybrid army-civilian rule, finds itself in a rather tight knot. There are democrats but no democracy, and there are revolutionaries, of all colours, but the revolution may have been compromised.
Indeed, under Morsi , Egyptx2019;s economy has dwindled. Both unemployment and inflation worsened. To add insult to injury, relations with the IMF took a downward turn. The petrol and electricity shortage looked grim. The Brotherhood were not sufficiently inclusive, added to polarisation, more or less looked down on secularists, and insisted, during a transitional period calling for confidence, consensus-building and power-sharing, on permanent solutions coloured by their preference for a society informed by their version of Islamism. Transitional and distributive justice were overlooked and neither Morsi nor the Brotherhood were smart enough to realise the state they thought they led was actually too deep to change overnight into a legal edifice. This is part of their failure.
It is, however, a moral failing to think the army is the solution. Just as the Brotherhood could not on their own be the solution.
The coup sets a terrible precedent. It reinvents the wheel of democratisation. Everyone is now propagating the x201C;political heresyx201D; that democracy is not elections. That does not mean that coups that eject democratically elected governments are a democratic norm. Some Tunisian politicians x2013; sore losers x2013; have been demanding to backslide to the x201C;legitimacy of the streetx201D;, not of institutions and orderly processes. I am for the continuity of a revolutionary ethos in tandem with democratisation, not replacing it, in order to enhance democracy learning, capacity-building, and consolidation that supplements formal processes.
Sisi, ElBaradei and others have now indicated across the Arab world that elections Islamists win are not acceptable. If not given the path of democratic integration and rehabilitation, as a legally protected right, they will not be stopped from going underground or striking back a la al-Qaeda against all symbols of officialdom.
Damage control today is beyond announcing a timetable for elections and giving democracy a x201C;second chancex201D; x2013; as hoped by at least one US official. There is a legal and moral bottleneck that Sisi will not easily surpass: a crime that cannot go uninvestigated or unpunished. For now this is more of a worry than simply persuading dissenters and anti-coup voices and forces to join Sisix2019;s bandwagon. Ignoring it will be a recipe for disaster in Egypt. Recovering public trust is no longer only about restoring the democratisation process.
Even if Sisix2019;s military intervention presented a red herring in terms of x201C;legalityx201D; or legitimacy, yeterdayx2019;s killings do not. There is nothing x201C;legalx201D; in killing fellow Egyptians for the simple crime of marching in Egypt after January 25, 2011.
Their deaths will weigh heavy on him, and ultimately, that burden may seal the deal on his fate.
 Larbi Sadiki is a specialist in Arab democratisation, revolution and transitions, and has been an academic at Australian National University, Exeter University, Westminster University and Qatar University. He is the author ofxA0;xA0; Arab Democratization: Elections without DemocracyxA0; xA0;Oxford University Press, 2009 andxA0;xA0; The Search for Arab Democracy: Discourses and Counter-Discourses xA0;Columbia University Press, 2004. 
