US President Barack Obama has called the Senatex2019;s vote to override his veto on a bill that allows families of the victims ofxA0;thexA0;September 11, 2001,xA0;attacks to sue Saudi Arabiax2019;s government a mistake.
Calling it a x201C;political votex201D;, Obama said on Wednesday that the bill would set x201C;a dangerous precedentx201D; that could put US troops and interests at risk.
x201C;If we eliminate this notion of sovereign immunity, then our men and women in uniform around the world could potentially start seeing ourselves subject to reciprocal loss,x201D; Obama said during a town hall meeting-style interview on CNN, referring to potential lawsuits.
Earlier on Wednesday, the US Congress passed into law the controversial bill that allows family members of 9/11 victims to sue Saudi Arabia for its alleged backing of the attackers.
Both the Senate and House voted overwhelmingly on Wednesday in favour of the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act, or JASTA.
x201C;The White House and the executive branch are far more interested in diplomatic considerations,x201D; said Senator Chuck Schumer, a sponsor of the bill. x201C;Wex2019;re more interested in the families and in justice.x201D;
The vote was a blow to Obama and to Saudi Arabia x2013; one of the USx2019; oldest allies in the Arab world.























xA0;Former senator speaks about 9/11 report





Obama, who vetoed the measure last week, said in a letter to Senate leaders on Tuesday thatxA0;other countries could use JASTA to justify similar immunity exceptions to target US policies and activities that they oppose.
x201C;If any of these litigants were to win judgments x2013; based on foreign domestic laws as applied by foreign courts x2013; they would begin to look to the assets of the US government held abroad to satisfy those judgments, with potentially serious financial consequences for the United States,x201D; Obama said at the time.
Obamax2019;s veto was overturned in Wednesdayx2019;s congressional vote x2013; the first override of his presidency.
Fifteen of the 19 men who carried out the 2001 attacks were Saudi nationals.xA0;Families of the victims spent years lobbying lawmakers for the right to sue the kingdom in US courts for any role elements of Saudi Arabiax2019;s government may have played.
Saudi Arabia has long denied any involvement in the attacks that killed nearly 3,000 people. Riyadh strongly objected to the bill.
Al Jazeera requested comment from the Saudi embassy in Washington but did not receive a response by the time of publication.
 READ MORE: President Barack Obama vetoes 9/11 bill 
Speaking after the Senate vote, White House spokesman Josh Earnest called the move x201C;the single most embarrassing thing the United States Senate has done possibly since 1983x201D; and x201C;an abdication of their basic responsibilities as elected representatives of the American peoplex201D;.
Stephen Kinzer, a senior fellow at the Watson Institute for International and Public Affairs at Brown University, said the eight-decade-long US-Saudi relationship was x201C;entering into a new phasex201D;.
























Congressmen call for release of 9/11 report






Other analysts warned that Saudi Arabia could, in response to the law, pull billions of dollars from the US economyxA0;and persuade close allies in the Gulf Cooperation Council to scale back counterterrorism cooperation, investment, and US access to important regional military bases.
x201C;This should be clear to America and to the rest of the world: When one GCC state is targeted unfairly, the others stand around it,x201D; said Abdulkhaleq Abdullah, an Emirati Gulf specialist and professor of political science at United Arab Emirates University.
x201C;All the states will stand by Saudi Arabia in every way possible.x201D;
Chas Freeman, former US assistant secretary of defence and ambassador to Saudi Arabia during Operation Desert Storm, said the Saudis could respond to the law in ways that risk US strategic interests, such as permissive rules for overflight between Europe and Asia, and the Qatari airbase from which US military operations in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Syria are directed and supported.
x201C;The souring of relations and curtailing of official contacts that this legislation would inevitably produce could also jeopardise Saudi cooperation against anti-American terrorism,x201D; he said.
Saudi Foreign Minister Adel al-Jubeir told reporters in June that the US had the most to lose if JASTA was enacted.
Joseph Gagnon, a senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, said estimates put the figure of official Saudi assets in the US at between $500bn and $1 trillion, when considering potential foreign bank deposits and offshore accounts.

