US President Barack Obama hasxA0;signed a secret order authorising US support for rebelsxA0;seeking to depose Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and hisxA0;government, Reuters news agency said quotingxA0;sources familiar with the matter.
Obamax2019;s order, approved earlier this year and known as anxA0;intelligence x201C;findingx201D;, broadly permits the CIA and other US agencies to provide aid that could help the rebelsxA0;dislodgexA0;Assad from power.
The shift towards supporting Assadx2019;s armed opponents intensified following last monthx2019;s failure of thexA0;UN Security Council to agree on tougher sanctions against thexA0;Damascus government.
The full extent of clandestine support that agencies likexA0;the CIA might be providing also is unclear.xA0;White House spokesman Tommy Vietor declined comment on the matter.
The White HousexA0;has apparently stopped short of giving the rebels lethal weapons, even as some US allies have been doing just that.
US and European officials have said that there havexA0;been noticeable improvements in the coherence and effectivenessxA0;of Syrian rebel groups in the past few weeks. That represents axA0;significant change in assessments of the rebels by WesternxA0;officials, who previously characterised Assadx2019;s opponents as axA0;disorganised.xA0;
Overt support
Separately from the presidentx2019;s secret order, the ObamaxA0;administration has stated publicly that it is providing somexA0;backing for Assadx2019;s opponents.
The State Department said on Wednesday the US government had set aside a total of $25m for x201C;non-lethalx201D; assistance to the rebels.
A US official said that was mostlyxA0;for communications equipment, including encrypted radios.
The State Department also says the US has setxA0;aside $64m in humanitarian assistance for the SyrianxA0;people, including contributions to the World Food Program, thexA0;International Committee of the Red Cross and other aid agencies.
x2018;Nerve centrex2019;
A US government source acknowledged that under provisionsxA0;of the presidential finding, the US was collaboratingxA0;with a secret command centre operated by Turkey and its allies.
Last week, Reuters reported that, along with Saudi ArabiaxA0;and Qatar, Turkey had established a secret base near the SyrianxA0;border to help direct vital military and communications supportxA0;to Assadx2019;s opponents.
This x201C;nerve centrex201D; is in Adana, a city in southern TurkeyxA0;about 100km from the Syrian border, which is alsoxA0;home to Incirlik, a US airbase where US military andxA0;intelligence agencies maintain a substantial presence.
Turkish authoritiesxA0;are said to bexA0;increasingly involved in providing Syrian rebels with trainingxA0;and possibly equipment.
European government sources said wealthy families in SaudixA0;Arabia and Qatar were providing significant financing to thexA0;rebels. Senior officials of the Saudi and Qatari governmentsxA0;have publicly called for Assadx2019;s departure.
On Tuesday, reports emerged that the Free Syrian Army hadxA0;obtained nearly two dozen surface-to-air missiles, weapons that could be used against Assadx2019;s helicopters and fixed-wingxA0;aircraft.
Syrian government armed forces have employed such airxA0;power more extensively in recent days.
NBC network said the shoulder-fired missiles, also known as MANPADs,xA0;had been delivered to the rebels via Turkey.
On Wednesday, however, Bassam al-Dada, a political adviserxA0;to the Free Syrian Army, denied the NBC report, telling thexA0;Arabic-language TV network Al-Arabiya that the group had x201C;notxA0;obtained any such weapons at allx201D;.
US government sources saidxA0;they could not confirm the MANPADs deliveries, but could notxA0;rule them out either.
Current and former US and European officials previouslyxA0;said that weapons supplies, which were being organised andxA0;financed by Qatar and Saudi Arabia, were largely limited to gunsxA0;and a limited number of anti-tank weapons, such as bazookas.
