On the morning of February 17, 1972, President Richard Nixon came out to the White House lawn to deliver a message to the American people about his plan for peace with the Peoplex2019;s Republic of China. China, a nuclear power, had been an implacable rival of the United States since the outset of the Cold War; yet after months of delicate diplomacy Nixon had decided to take the momentous step of making a major state visit to the Hermit Kingdom.xA0;
Speaking to the national media Nixon would say: x201C;I am under no impression that 20 years of hostility between the Peoplex2019;s Republic of China and the United States of America are going to be swept away in one week of talksx201D; and, yet, he was making a x201C;journey of peacex201D; in an attempt to do what many American hawks said was impossible: build a constructive and peaceful relationship with the PRC.xA0;
Nixonx2019;s trip ended up as a historical turning point. His overture broke the stalemate between the two powers, and with the benefit of hindsight it is easy to see just how much he accomplished. Today the Peoplex2019;s Republic has been transformed from an enemy into a major trading partner of the United States and a partner in the existing international order.xA0;
Furthermore, by reaching out diplomatically to a Communist country at the height of the Cold War, Nixon was able to undercut the Soviet Union and help set the stage for its collapse in the coming decade. Such opportunities for transcendent change come rarely, and it is to Nixonx2019;s credit that he was able to seize it and alter the course of history.
Today, it appears that President Barack Obama may be coming upon a similarly momentous opportunity with the Islamic Republic of Iran. At a time when many in the US claim to be locked in a new x2018;Cold Warx2019; with the Muslim world, the opportunity to come to peace with the country in which political Islam first came to power would be incalculably significant.
For the first time in over a decade, moderate and ostensibly peace-seeking leaders are in control of the Presidency in both Iran and the United States. If Obama can seize the initiative at this critical moment, he will have a chance to radically alter the fate of the Middle East and create his own legacy as a leader who managed to bring peace to this troubled, yet deeply significant region of the world.
Missed Connections
In the words of Brookings Institute scholar Suzanne Maloney: x201C;Iran is the country whose break with the West ended our innocence about the worldx2019;s affections for usx201D;. However while the American relationship with modern Iran has been marked by CIA-backed coups, terrorism, the outright murder of civilians, proxy-warfare and bloodcurdlingly hostile rhetoric on both sides, there have been glimmers of hope in which each party has sought to change the poisonous relationship between them.
In 2000, reformist Iranian President Mohammed Khatami called for a x201C;Dialogue of Civilisationsx201D; to mend the differences between Iran and the United States. In subsequent years, Iranians would hold mass candlelight vigils for Americans as they suffered through the terrorist attacks of September 11 and Iran would provide crucial aid to the US war against the Taliban. Unfortunately, these overtures were snubbed by the neoconservative government of George W. Bush which was bent on violently remaking the entire Middle East in its image.xA0;
The Bush Administrationx2019;s curt response to Iranx2019;s offer of a diplomatic x2018;Grand Bargainx2019; was, in the words of former Vice-President Dick Cheney, x201C;we donx2019;t negotiate with evilx201C;. Bushx2019;s facile subsequent designation of Iran as a member of an international x2018;Axis of Evilx2019; kicked off a new shadow war between Iran and the United States, and in the words of former US Ambassador to Afghanistan Ryan Crocker x201C;changed the course of historyx201C;.
When Barack Obama came to power in 2008 offering to x201C;extend a hand if Iran would unclench its fistx201D; it was Iranians hardliners turn to miss an opportunity. Obamax2019;s overtures were largely ignored and the conflict between the two countries continued to ratchet up to its present level. However just when many analysts had become resigned to the likelihood of outright war between the two powers, it was the people of Iran who sent a powerful message demanding a change to the poisonous status quo.
An Opportunity to Change
With the electoral victory this year of the moderate cleric Hassan Rouhani, it appears that for the first time since the Islamic Revolution majorities in both Iran and the United States are in favour of rapprochement. Rouhani has said that he has been elected by his people with a x2018;mandate for changex2018;, and that he has been given the green-light by Ayatollah Ali Khamenei to seek peaceful dxE9;tente with America.xA0;
In what appeared to be an American recognition of this possibility, Rouhanix2019;s recent visit to the United Nations General Assembly was capped by a historic phone from President Barack Obama x2013; the first direct contact between American and Iranian leaders since the fall of the dictator Reza Pahlavi in 1979. Obama expressed his belief that the issues of contention between them could be peacefully resolved and ended their call saying x2018;Khodafezx2019; or x2018;God be With Youx2019; x2013; a cordial ending to what could perhaps be a new beginning for the long-estranged nations.
The Key to a New Middle East
An end to the decades-long x2018;Twilight Warx2019; between Iran and the United States would have major implications for the future stability of the Middle East. The impetus for the ongoing proxy conflicts in Syria and Iraq would evaporate and the United States would be able to withdraw from Afghanistan more likely to leave behind a stable government than one fatally endangered by the Taliban. Meaningful peace in the region could finally be envisioned if the US and Iran reached dxE9;tente.
Furthermore, a resumption of good relations between America and Iran would allow these two civilisations to once more engage in the types of trade and cultural dialogue which have been halted due to the past half-century of conflict. In the past, Americans were held in esteem by Iranians and many were considered part of the countryx2019;s pantheon of anti-colonial heroes x2013; a history which has been tragically obscured due to the present conflict.
A return to an era of cordial and respectful relations under an Islamic government would have major reverberations upon Americax2019;s relations with the Muslim world at large, and could help put an end to the ongoing generational conflict with Muslim-majority countries just as Nixonx2019;s rapprochement with China helped end the Cold War.
But the path to such an outcome will not be easy. Already neoconservatives in the United States x2013; long bent on launching America into another major warx2013; have mobilised in opposition to peace talks. Notably, hardline Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has made no secret of his plans to torpedo any burgeoning rapprochement and to ensure that conflict between America and Iran continues on the path towards military confrontation. If there is to be any hope of meaningful change, President Obama will have to display the leadership necessary to face down these rejectionists who remain committed to maintaining the status quo.
Delivering on x2018;Changex2019;
When President Nixon made his monumental breakthrough with China, he had to confront a similar set of challenges. The United States was in the midst of another disastrous war and occupation, and hardened Cold-warriors within Nixonx2019;s own government were staunchly opposed to making any type of peace with the Chinese.xA0;
However Nixon held fast to his vision, and today we see the results. Forty years ago China and the United States were hostile powers, ideologically opposed to each other and engaged in a brutal proxy war. Today, they are close to becoming one anotherx2019;s largest trading partners. If Barack Obama can put an end to Americax2019;s conflict with Iran; another proud, ancient civilisation similar to China, there is no telling what the two countries relationship may look like another forty years from now.xA0;
The present opening for peace with Iran is a rare historical opportunity. Like Hassan Rouhani, Obama was elected by his people with a mandate for x2018;changex2019; from the disastrous policies of a hardline predecessor. Should Obama be able to seize this moment, he will be able to deliver on this promise both at home and abroad.
Murtaza Hussain is a Toronto-based writer and analyst focused on issues related to Middle Eastern politics.
Follow him on Twitter:xA0;MazMHussain
