Just a year after Mohamed Morsix2019;s birth in 1951, Egyptx2019;s decades-long monarchy rule was overthrown in a military-led coup under Gamal Abdel Nasser.
Nasser would go on to pilot Egypt through a fitful transition into socialism, becoming a lasting symbol for the pan-Arab ideology unfurling across the region. Morsi would go on to join the Muslim Brotherhood, the very group that supported Nasserx2019;s revolution but then buckled under a crackdown once his government took office.
Initially a collaborator during the era of independence, the Muslim Brotherhood saw its members shunted into jail cells as Nasserx2019;s secular regime swung from tolerance to state repression in its treatment of the group.
But the Muslim Brotherhood, often regarded as one of the most important political organisations in the Arab world, survived the crackdown under Nasser, retaining a political buoyancy that kept it afloat throughout decades of regime change.

READ MORE: The many battles of Egyptx2019;s Muslim Brotherhood

After Anwar Sadat took power and folded back on many of Nasserx2019;s socialist policies, the Brotherhood was once more eased into Egyptx2019;s political scene as a counterweight for the clout of Sadatx2019;s leftist rivals.
Having gained its re-entrance, the group cobbled together a significant popular base among Egyptx2019;s lower middle and middle classes and began seeking out backdoor channels of power.
Morsi came of political age among the Muslim Brotherhood generation that had protested on college campuses in the 1970s x2013; a widespread student movement, and a foreshadowing of the Egyptian youthx2019;s role in the later 2011 revolution. The group formally adopted a mandate of democracy in 1995, and its influence leaked into professional work syndicates and circles of social welfare work.
x201C;There was a generation of the Muslim Brotherhood that came of age in the late 70s and 80s that was far more engaged in society,x201D; said Abdullah al-Arian, assistant professor at the Georgetown University School of Foreign Service in Qatar who specialises on modern Islamist movements.
x201C;They believed that the best way to expand the organisationx2019;s mission was by filling certain necessary roles in society. They started schools, ran mosques, and ran medical centres,x201D; added al-Arian, noting that gaps in government services allowed the organisation to extend its reach.
























Inside Story x2013; No mercy for Morsi







xA0;
Yet Morsi was not among the group that demonstrated on college campuses and, later, posed an ideological challenge to the organisationx2019;s older, more insulated generation.
x201C;He wasnx2019;t a student leader; he joined the Brotherhood relatively late,x201D; said Al-Arian. x201C;Instead, he was what you might call a loyal member who deferred to the senior leadership, and because of his loyalty was rewarded through continuous promotion.x201D;
Later, Morsi was part of the cohort that wedged a space for the Muslim Brotherhood under Mubarakx2019;s government, earning himself a seat in Parliament in 2000. Once a secretive organisation, knitted out of the strong bonds of mentor-disciple relationships, the Muslim Brotherhood was morphing into a multivocal political platform with an emphasis on social justice.
Under Mubarak, the Muslim Brotherhood enjoyed what scholar Mona el-Ghobasy calls x201C;de facto tolerationx201D;. Strict election rulesxA0;made it impossible for MP candidates to run as independents, effectively tilting all the political clout to Mubarakx2019;s ruling National Democratic Party NDP.xA0;
Yet by making alliances with other parties, the group gained a substantial presence in Parliament and an even more substantial presence in Egyptian civic society, with leadership roles in local committees and professional unions. In these elections, Muslim Brotherhood candidates were favoured for their organisational prowess and their transparent management of syndicate finances.
But the Muslim Brotherhood occupied an uneasy space in Mubarakx2019;s regime, especially after it won a fifth of the countryx2019;s parliamentary seats in 2005. Election fraud left the group with just 20 percent of seats and denied Morsi another term in Parliament. When Morsi spoke out, participating in a demonstration that supported judges who wanted more independence, he was sentenced to jail for seven months.

OPINION: Sisix2019;s ever-widening terrorism net

Born in a conservative town on the Nile Delta, Morsi sketches an interesting political figure. He earned a PhD from a US university in California, headed the engineering department at one of Egyptx2019;s biggest universities, and his profile on the Brotherhood website boasts a consulting stint with the NASA space programme perplexingly, Morsi later denied ever having worked there in a local TV interview.
Morsi has also taken strong stances on social practices he views as blasphemous.
In 2011, he led a boycott of a major Egyptian mobile phone company because its owner had tweeted cartoon depictions of Minnie Mouse in a face veil.xA0;
Four years earlier, he had been tasked with helping author a position paper for the Guidance Council, the Brotherhoodx2019;s ruling group. The final mandates included a ban on women and Coptic Christians from serving as president, as well as the formation of a council of Islamic scholars to advise Parliament on the law. Their role would be extra-constitutional, but non-binding.
By 2012, a newly-elected Morsi had refined his stance.
x201C;I will not prevent a woman from being nominated as a candidate for the presidency,x201D; he told a New York Times reporter. x201C;This is not in the Constitution. This is not in the law. But if you want to ask me if I will vote for her or not, that is something else, that is different.x201D;

Timeline: Egyptx2019;s revolution

The Muslim Brotherhood has always claimed to infuse society with a core Islamic ethic, adopting derisive stances on everything from Israel to beauty contests. Yet along Egyptx2019;s ideological expanse, they often inch towards the middle, flanked on the right by the more conservative Salafis.
Far from an ideological megaphone, the Brotherhood does not have a mission so much as an internal conversation x2013; spun across generations x2013; about the Islamic ethic and what kind of reach it should have in society. As power in Egyptx2019;s political arena shifted, so have the Brotherhoodx2019;s ideological priorities.
x201C;The 2011 revolution was a massive wake-up call,x201D; said al-Arian. x201C;The Brotherhood all of a sudden had to take much more concrete positions on things. The more concrete their positions became, the far more likely it was that they werenx2019;t going to impose these ideological stances.x201D;
al-Arian highlighted the Brotherhoodx2019;s approach to foreign policy. Staunchly opposed to Zionist policies, the Brotherhood had still maintained the Gaza blockade, despite easing border restrictions.
x201C;This is not an organisation that at any point wanted to impose the headscarf or draconian penalties,x201D; added al-Arian. x201C;The idea that they were going into government for a social revolution is unfounded.x201D;
























People amp; Power x2013; Egypt: Revolution Revisited





The Brotherhood was navigating tricky political space when Morsi became the countryx2019;s first democratically elected president in 2012. His successful campaign contradicted earlier claims by the Brotherhood that they would not run a presidential candidate.
When Morsi came to office, it was in the aftermath of a revolution, among a highly polarised population that gave him 51.7 percent of the vote.
According to Wael Haddara, one of Morsix2019;s campaign advisers, the president appealed to a public desire for a more accessible, everyday man as leader.
x201C;The counternarrative that Morsi wasnx2019;t a popular person, that Egypt needed a more charismatic figure, was not true x2026; For the first four months, Morsix2019;s popularity ranking was in the stratosphere,x201D; Haddara told Al Jazeera.
x201C;He presented to people an accessible figure. A vast majority of Egyptians eking out a living, struggling to make ends meet, looked at Morsi as one of their own,x201D; he added.
When Morsi swore an informal oath in Tahrir Square, he opened his jacket before supporters to show he wasnx2019;t wearing a bulletproof vest. Upon taking office, one of his first decisions was to order the release of 572 prisoners that had been detained after the revolution by the army.
Morsi himself had been jailed during the 2011 uprising, before escaping in a mass prison break among other Brotherhood leaders and members of Hamas and Hezbollah.

One of Morsiapos;s mistakes during his presidency was that he led people to assume that heapos;d taken the reigns of the state when in fact he hadnapos;t. He was simply put in a position to give people the idea that a real revolution had occurred. The state, meanwhile, was very much in the hands of the same people as it was under Mubarak
Abdullah al-Arian, Georgetown University Assistant Professor of History


Despite any perception of Morsi as a man of the people, however, Egyptx2019;s new president faced stiff political opposition and the hard ridges of a divisive post-revolutionary society.
The president was officially sworn into office two weeks after the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces SCAF issued an interim declaration, awarding itself all legislative powers and effectively stripping Morsix2019;s office of authority. The lower house of parliament, with its Brotherhood majority, had also been dissolved by Egyptx2019;s Mubarak-era Supreme Constitutional Court SCC.
x201C;One of Morsix2019;s mistakes during his presidency was that he led people to assume that hex2019;d taken the reigns of the state when in fact he hadnx2019;t. He was simply put in a position to give people the idea that a real revolution had occurred. The state, meanwhile, was very much in the hands of the same people as it was under Mubarak,x201D; said al-Arian.
As Morsi navigated the political potholes of office, opposition politicians pelted him with criticism for what they saw as dictatorial manoeuvresxA0;to wrangle back power. In August 2012, Morsi nullified the SCAF declaration and put forth one of his own, allotting himself the power to pass laws and select a new constitution-drafting committee.
Morsi promised to forgo these expansive powers after the election of a new parliament, yet some still saw his decision as a political overstep.
The move was coupled with the forced retirement of Mubarak-era senior generals, political strongholds who had been entrenched in Egyptx2019;s elite circles for decades.

INTERACTIVE: Egyptx2019;s Lost Power

x201C;Morsi often talked about the idea that an individual may have an opportunity for change that will come along three times or even four times. You can blow your opportunity and another will come,x201D; said Haddara. x201C;Nations arenx2019;t like that. You may have an opportunity once every generation, and January 25 represented that.x201D;
Though Morsi was mindful of the sacrifices made during the January 2011 uprising before him, his efforts to push the country ahead were often stalled or criticised.
In November 2012, after garnering international goodwill for helping broker a ceasefire between Israel and Hamas, Morsi issued a decree that further broadened his executive powers and granted protection to the committee drafting a new constitution. The move was widely seen as a way to shield the committee from challenges by Mubarak-era judges.
x201C;If we did not actually have a constitution, then we would be back to square zero,x201D; said Haddara of the manoeuvre. x201C;Much in the same way that the parliament was dissolved by an organ of the ancien regime, the fear here was that this would mean harking back to greater instability for the country.x201D;

OPINION: The many trials of Mohamed Morsi

Yet, some outraged critics saw the move as unacceptable. By the time he revoked his decision 10 days later, Brotherhood supporters and leftists had already clashed outside the presidential palace in deadly street fights.
x201C;When it comes to politics, itx2019;s all about how you package your decisions as a leader. Morsi could have done a better job at presenting what he was doing. He was indeed trying to fulfil the demands of the revolutionaries, but because he had engendered so much ill-will x2013; especially after a shameless media campaign that constructed an exaggerated image of him x2013; when he finally did something, everyone was outraged,x201D; said al-Arian.
Riddled with walk-outs by liberal, leftist and Mubarak-era politicians, the constitutional drafting process had been portrayed by some critics as an exclusionary endeavour, void of the potential for dialogue. Yet in a televised address after Novemberx2019;s legal changes, one of Morsix2019;s advisers, Gehad al-Haddad, claimed that the x201C;door is still openx201D;.
Though the president had frequently been criticised for refusing to step outside his trust circle, supporters point to his efforts to be inclusive. In December 2012, Morsix2019;s appointments to the upper house of parliament had been 75 percent non-Islamist affiliated.
And according to Haddara, throughout Morsix2019;s time in office, his popularity never dipped below 60 to 55 percent.
Yet Morsix2019;s presidency was complicated by the heavy economic frustration weighing on Egyptx2019;s population. The currencyx2019;s value was faltering, and unemployment had ballooned to 13 percent x2013; all the while, Morsi was failing to secure a loan with the IMF.
Haddara notes that, when Morsi came to office, foreign currency reserves had been sapped by SCAF. Even so, gross domestic productxA0;grew from 1.8 percent to 2.2 percent against market prices between 2011 and 2012, and Haddara claims that tourism registered a return to pre-2011 levels.



A mediascape saturated with bias, in which local TV stations were quick to criticise Morsix2019;s policies, labelled Brotherhood supporters as x2018;terroristsx2018; and cheered on air after the president was arrested, did not help the executive officex2019;s image.
x201C;There were real issues that cannot be minimised x2026;On the other hand, the media exaggerated some of the challenges that were being depicted,x201D; said Haddara, noting the x201C;magical disappearancex201D; of certain social and economic grievances once Abdel Fattah el-Sisi came to power.
Others complain that Morsix2019;s efforts had bumped against the bureaucracies and entanglements erected by a deep state. Morsix2019;s minister of supply says Egyptx2019;s deep state was actively working against him, noting that gas stations raised their prices and did not implement a smart card system designed by Morsi that would have tracked fuel shipments.
x201C;I donx2019;t think that the Brotherhood ever maintained political power; instead, there was an illusion of power that they played along with,x201D; said al-Arian.
Lambasted for doing too much in the political arena, but too little for gas prices and food security, Morsi attempted to pacify the population in one of his last speeches in June 2013.
x201C;I have made mistakes,x201D; he admitted, but the crowds gathered at Tahrir Square by then did not care for his conciliatory tone.
By this point, protests both in favour of and against Morsix2019;s removal were rolling across the country. Days later, Morsi was issued an ultimatum by the military to either step down or face a military coup. He was overthrown on July 3, 2013, and placed under house arrest, where he was held incommunicado.
One short, roiling year after his election, Morsix2019;s time in office was cut short by a military takeover. Today, he sits in a jail cell, facing a death sentence and charges that range from leaking intelligence information to collaborating with foreign forces to free Islamists from jail in 2011.
