Egyptian presidential candidate Hamdeen Sabahi is a controversial self-styled socialist politician with a long history of political activism. He is running against leading presidential contender Abdel Fattah el-Sisi. Sabahi has been a long-time advocatexA0;of economic justice, Arab unity and independent foreign policy.
Born in 1954, Sabahi began a career in political activism in 1970. He was elected as head of the Cairo University student union in 1973. Four years later, and following the January 1977 uprising against former President Anwar Sadat over a hike in food prices, Sabahi publicly confronted the president in a televised meeting. He was consequently prohibited from working as a journalist in the state media sector for several years.
Throughout his career, Sabahi wore many hats: a journalist, an activist, a publisher, a two-time member of parliament under Hosni Mubarak and a populist opposition figure.
He participated in the 2011 uprising that ousted Hosni Mubarak, and having built up substantial grassroots support in the following months, Sabahi registered to run in the countryx2019;s first post-uprising presidential election. Mohamed Morsi ultimately won the 2012 vote, while Sabahi came in third with about 4.8 million votes.

RELATED: Egyptx2019;s surprise candidate: Hamdeen SabahixA0;

During the parliamentary elections that preceded Morsix2019;s election, Sabahi struck an alliance with the Muslim Brotherhoodx2019;s political party, the Freedom and Justice Party FJP. Sabahix2019;s Karama Dignity Party, along with the FJP and other parties, formed an alliance that won the main bloc in the post-revolution parliament.
Sabahix2019;s relationship with the Muslim Brotherhood was later strained. He told the press that he turned down an offer to be Morsix2019;s vice president, and cast doubts on whether parliamentary elections could be held fairly under Morsi. Sabahi also repeatedly warned of the movementx2019;s efforts to take over the state before the July 3, 2013 military coup that ousted Morsi.
Sabahi and his aides later criticised violations committed by the new regime during the 2014 constitutional referendum. Sabahi also told a local television channel that the 2012 presidential elections x201C;were conducted in a more equal and open political atmosphere than upcoming electionsx201D;. Still, Sabahi has vowed to remain in the presidential race.
Some pro-revolution voices had urged Sabahi not to run, saying the upcoming election is a sham and that by running, Sabahi would legitimise unfair elections in the eyes of the international community.
Since July 3, Sabahi has openly supported the countryx2019;s new military-backed rulers. He backed a transitional political roadmap, a constitutional referendum and a ban on all Muslim Brotherhood activities. He even advocated a ban on the FJP to prevent the countryx2019;s biggest and most organised Islamist movement from returning to power.
The socialist politician presents himself as the man most capable of protecting the new regime in Egypt. He hasxA0;calledxA0;Sisi a x201C;herox201D; of the 2013 uprising, but repeatedly urged him not to run for president, saying it would be a sign of military intervention in politics and give more legitimacy to voices calling Morsix2019;s removal from office by the army a military coup.
Sabahi also believes he is the man most capable of preventing the Muslim Brotherhood from coming back to power in the long run, because of his political background as a Mubarak opponent and his socialist tendencies, which emphasise democracy and economic justice.
SabahixA0;accusesxA0;the Muslim Brotherhood of being x201C;politically responsiblex201D; for x201C;terrorismx201D; in Egypt and portrays the groupx2019;s ongoing protests as being x201C;full of violence and provocativex201D;. On August 14, 2013, the day security forces used force to disperse pro-Morsi sit-in camps in Cairo and Giza, SabahixA0;expressedxA0;on Twitter his support for police and the military.
Still, Sabahi has been critical of interim regime policies towards the Muslim Brotherhood, vowing that if elected president he would end the media campaign against the groupx2019;s members, curb the police campaign against them and help integrate them as individuals into Egyptx2019;s society and political system.xA0;

RELATED: Sisi: The Godot of EgyptxA0;

For decades, Sabahi has participated in establishing solidarity campaigns and committees with both Lebanese and Palestinian groups opposed to the normalisation of relations with Israel. He also supportsxA0;economic policies that address social justice, such as implementing an across-the-board $170 monthly minimum wage for government employees, protecting government subsidies that benefit the poor and raising taxes paid by the rich. Sabahi also wants to protect government-owned companies and adopt a policy of industrialisation.
As a self-proclaimed Nasserite and a follower of pan-Arab ideals promoted by former Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser, Sabahi says he is a strong believer in Arab unity and in strengthening Arab relations. He has praised the UAE and Saudi Arabia for supporting Egypt after Morsix2019;s ouster. He toldxA0;a local television channel that had the Morsi regime remained in power, x201C;it could have exported war on the Gulf regimes to their soil. They the Gulf countries are paying Egypt in order to keep such war away from their homesx201D;.
On Syria, Sabahi supportsxA0;a more cautious policy and is critical of x201C;the criminal armed gangs that have stolen the Syrian revolution to serve the interests of a group of Takfiris religious hardlinersx201D;. Sabahi and representatives of his campaign have appeared on pro-Syrian regime television stations, such Al Mayadeen and Al Manar.
Sabahi wants to build better relations with Turkey, Iran and Russia. He xA0;praisedxA0;a recent trip made by Sisi to Russia as x201C;a step to correct Egyptx2019;s role because Egypt needs to strike balanced relations with world powersx201D;.
Sabahi is more critical of Egyptx2019;s relations with the United States and says if elected president, he would work to amend Egyptx2019;s peace treaty with Israel to give Egypt more of a security presence in Sinai. He would also work to ease the suffering of Gazans and to support Palestinian resistance to the Israeli occupation,xA0;emphasising that defending legitimate rights x201C;does not mean slipping into war with Israelx201D;.
