Barack Obama, the Democratic presidential candidate, said he wanted a running mate who would be prepared to step in as president, could help him govern and would challenge him.
In Joe Biden,xA0;a 35-year veteran of the Senate,xA0;Obama has chosen a Washington insider with extensive experience and a reputation forxA0;speaking his mind.xA0;
The chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Biden has met many world leaders andxA0;is one of the most influential foreign policy voices in the US Congress.
An internationalist and strong supporter of the United Nations, he has been a leading critic of what he sees as the vague, unilateralist approach of George Bush, the incumbent president.
Recently he travelled to the Georgian capital Tbilisi, at the invitation of Mikheil Saakashvili, the president, and criticised Russiax2019;s conduct in the conflict over the breakaway region of South Ossetia.
Iraq critic
In 2002, Biden voted to authorise the US-led invasion of Iraq, which Obama opposed from the start, butxA0;has since become a firm critic of thexA0;war.
Last year, hexA0;pushed through a resolution declaring that Bushx2019;s so-called troop surge x2013; which has been hailed as a success x2013; was x201C;not in the national interestx201D;. He also won praise for a peace plan which would have divided the country along ethnic lines.
Biden also has a personal interest in the conflict, his son Beau, Delawarex2019;s district attorney and a national guard reservist, is due to leave for Iraq at the beginning of October.
x201C;I donx2019;t want him going,x201D; he told the crowd at a state fair crowd in Iowa. x201C;But I donx2019;t want my grandsons or granddaughters going back in 15 years. So how we leave makes a big difference.x201D;
Many see Biden as the ideal candidate for the traditional role of the vice-presidential candidate, attacking the other partyx2019;s man, given his lovexA0;of joining the debates on the USx2019;s political talk shows.
ButxA0;hisxA0;outspoken style has proved a hindrance on occasions,xA0;as he has become notorious forxA0;his long-winded answers.
However, in a debate last year, he countered a question on whether he had the self-discipline to cut down on his trademark style, simply saying: x201C;Yesx201D;.
Senate experience
A lifelong politician, 65-year-oldxA0;Biden outdoes even John McCain, Obamax2019;s Republican rival, in terms of Senate experience, having served five years more than the Arizona senator.






Biden is a prominent foreign policy voice, recently travelling to Georgia AFP 



ButxA0;there are echoes of Obamax2019;s youthful idealism in his past. He was one of the youngest politicians ever elected to the Senate and entered the race for the Democratic nomination in 1988 promising to x201C;rekindle the fire of idealism in our societyx201D;.
HexA0;wasxA0;reluctantly forced to quit that race three months later after he was caught plagiarising lines from a speech given by Neil Kinnock, the then leader of Britainx2019;s oppositionxA0;Labour party.xA0;xA0;
His latest bid for the White House was short-lived, pulling out of the race after getting less than 1 percent in the first nominating conquest in Iowa.
The event highlighted something which could become an issue on the campaign trail as a vice-presidential candidate, his propensity for gaffs.
Biden told the New York Observer newspaper: x201C;I mean, you got the first mainstream African American who is articulate, and bright and clean and a nice-looking guy.x201D;
Some took the remark to remark to be racially offensive, however, Obama said he was not offended and the matter was dropped.
He was also forced to defend his remark that x201C;you cannot go to a 7-Eleven or a Dunkinx2019; Donuts unless you have a slight Indian accentx201D;.
Car accident
Biden has suffered his fair share ofxA0;difficulties,xA0;both personal and political,xA0;during his 35 years in the Senate. Just weeks after his election in 1972, his firstxA0;wife Neilia andxA0;13-month-old daughter Naomi were killed in a car accident. His sons Beau and Hunt were badly hurt.
He was sworn in at the hospital bedsidexA0;of one of his sons and still refuses to work on December 18, the day of the accident.
He remarried 15 years later, having a daughter with his new wife Jill Tracy Jacobs.xA0;xA0;
The senatorxA0;himself had a brush with death in February 1988 when he was hospitalised with two brain aneurysms. It was seven months before he could return to the Senate.
Born in 1942,xA0;the Roman Catholic son of a Pennsylvania car salesman, Biden could help Obama connect with blue-collar Democrats who the campaign has so far struggled to attract.
He is seen as more down-to-earth than many Senate colleagues commuting by train from Delaware to Washington, DC, every day rather than taking a home in the capital.
