Israel and Saudi Arabia have been thexA0;hot subject of speculation and gossip in recent weeks. Not a day goes by without us hearing about their latest rendezvous, their winks and whims, their flirtations and fantasies.
Ix2019;m not sure Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman did indeed make a secret trip to Tel Aviv, but I did see former Saudi and Israeli intelligence chiefs share a stage at a New York synagogue last month.
The hilarity x2013; or rather, the calamity x2013; of the scene transcended the attempt at normality fromxA0;former head of Saudi intelligence, Prince Turki Al Faisal, with his English gentlemanx2019;s red socks, as he disagreed on stage with former Mossad director Efraim Halevy, as the latter argued in favour of maintaining the Iran nuclear deal. When an Israeli spymaster sounds like a moderate in comparison to his Saudi counterpart regarding a x201C;fellow Muslim nationx201D;, itx2019;s time to be alarmed.
At any rate, since Prince Turkix2019;s x201C;flirtationx201D; with another former Israeli spy and ex-foreign minister, Tzipi Livni, in Davos in January, informal meetings and overtures between the Israelis and the Saudis seem to have multiplied. Bahrain and the UAE have also joined in. Their objective is to preparexA0;the publicxA0;for the shock of normalisation, to normalise the idea of future normalisation with Israel.

Prince Turki Al Faisal, a former Saudi intelligence chief, with Efraim Halevy, a former Israeli Mossad director with others at the Temple Emanu-El Strieicker Center in New York City on October 22, 2017 James Reinl/Al Jazeera

Love and hate
The attraction between thexA0;Wahabi and Zionist leaders may be neither halal nor kosher, but itx2019;s nonetheless strong and getting stronger. And itx2019;s nothing new.
Their rapprochement is born out of necessity and driven, primarily, by mutual aversion rather than mutual attraction:xA0;aversion toxA0;the Iranian regime and fear of its expanding influence in the region. As those feelings grow,xA0;so does their relationship,xA0;in accordance with the realist proverb: my enemyx2019;s enemy is my friend.
Indeed, US President Donald Trump noticed with great satisfaction the x201C;really good feeling towards Israelx201D; in Saudi Arabia after his May visit to both countries. Since then hex2019;s been godfathering a trilateral arrangement with Israel and Saudi Arabia to confront Iranx2019;s x201C;fanatical regimex201C;and its regional aggression.

The Trump administration will fail to produce a credible and comprehensive peace strategy.
 


In an interview with the Saudi publication Elaph earlier this month x2013; yet another sign of normalisation x2013; Israelx2019;s military chief of staff, Gadi Eisenkot, explained how Iran threatens both Saudi ArabiaxA0;and Israel through not one but two parallel Shia crescents of influence that cross the region. To the north, one goes through Iraq, Syria and Lebanon andxA0;to the Mediterranean Sea; and to the south, axA0;second goes through the Gulf region, Yemen and to the banks ofxA0;the Red Sea.
Marriages of convenience have been built on much less.xA0;
Gains and losses
Judging from their public declarations, Israelis are terribly impatient. They want to take the Saudi relationship to a whole new level; they want to x201C;go steadyx201D; and they want to come out. And they want it yesterday. Their generation-old wet dream of public strategic engagement with moderate Sunni Arab regimes is finally comingxA0;true.
Israel has everything to gain and, if it can help it, nothing to lose, from the normalisation of relations with Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states. It could see its relations improve dramatically with many of the other 55 Muslim-majority countries, just as it saw a huge spike in its diplomatic and economic relations around the world after the 1993 Oslo Accords, including with the likes of Jordan and Qatar. Doha shut down Israelx2019;s trade office in the Gulf country in 2009 after the Israeli offensive on Gaza.

An Israeli activist holds a placard reading, x201C;Donx2019;t refuse peacex201D;, during a rally by the Peace Now group, in support of the Saudi Peace Initiative in Jerusalem on March 28, 2007.Kevin Frayer/AP

For Israel, shared strategic interests and shared goals with Saudi Arabia should suffice to normalise their relations and strengthen their union. But as Israeli Energy Minister Yuval Steinitzx2019;s latest revelations about Israelx2019;s long x201C;sharing of intelligencex201D; have shown, itx2019;s Riyadh, not Tel Aviv, that insists on secrecy out of a sense of shame.
When Saudi Arabia committed to a peace initiative that became an Arab League initiative in 2002, it expressed willingness to normalise relations with Israel but only after Israelx2019;s withdrawal from Palestinian and Arab territories and the establishment of a Palestinian state.
For Riyadh, quick and unconditional normalisation with its historical nemesis has long been a risky proposition for the kingdom and its regional standing. Even its more enthusiastic neighbour, the United Arab Emirates, has been, in the words of one Israeli expert, a silent partner.xA0;
Not any more. 
New leadership, new policy
It was quite shocking to seexA0;the above-mentioned Saudi interview with Israeli chief of staff totally and utterly ignore the Palestinian issue. Thatx2019;s clearly no mistake or lapse of journalistic judgment x2013; itx2019;s intentional. And itx2019;s politically motivated.
Has the Saudi and UAE leadership accepted Israelx2019;s generous offer on Iran in return for ignoring the plight of Palestine?xA0;Or does Riyadh still insist on Israel accepting the Arab initiative before formal normalisation begins?
It seems the Saudis and Israelis are waiting for clarifications and answers from President Trumpx2019;s proposal x2013;xA0;what he promises will be the x201C;ultimate dealx201D; to resolve the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. For example, will the US ask Israel to withdraw from East Jerusalem or will it pressure the Saudis to pressure the Palestinians to give up their right to a state and a capital? Or, perhaps, leave it in limbo?
Spare yourselves the suspense. The x201C;ultimate dealx201D; is the ultimate BS.
Why? Well, because the boy-wonder that Trump appointed as the best man for the job of resolving the century-old conflict is none other than his son-in-law, Jared Kushner x2013; axA0;lousy businessmanxA0;and a religious Zionist, whose claim to fame is marrying the right girl at the right time. Itx2019;s not even clear whether Kushnerx2019;s White House career will survive the Russia investigation, sincexA0;Special Counsel Robert Mueller is reportedlyxA0;after himxA0;forxA0;his role in the dismissal of FBI chief James Comey. Mueller is also looking into Kushnerx2019;s secret policy coordination with Israelx2019;s PM Benjamin Netanyahu to undermine the Obama administration during a UN vote on Israeli illegal settlements in Palestine.

White House senior adviser Jared Kushner walks with Ivanka Trump at the Royal Court Palace in Riyadh on May 20, 2017 Evan Vucci/AP

In my estimation, the Trump administration will fail to produce a credible andxA0;comprehensive peace strategy, and, like its predecessors, it will fail to resolve the x201C;Israel problemx201D; or stop the colonisation of Palestine. Likewise, the administration has no real actionable Iran strategy, and lacks the will and thexA0;intention to confrontxA0;Iran inxA0;various hotspots of the greater Middle East. 
Tweeting Iran into submission doesnx2019;t require Israeli or Saudi participation. Trump is more than capable.
Consequently, if the Saudi royals normalise with the x201C;Zionist usurpersx201D; of Jerusalem, theyx2019;ll find out that theyx2019;ve been exposed on all fronts. Theyx2019;ll learn that Israel wonx2019;t fight their battles for them. And they will also discover, rather late, that instead of putting Iran in a corner, normalisation with Israel in the absence of peace will empower and propagate Iranx2019;s role in the region.xA0; 
And therex2019;s more.
Before the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques surrenders al-Aqsa to the x201C;Zionistsx201D; or before the Salmans raise Israeli flags in Riyadh, itx2019;s worthwhile to consider the consequences of the late Egyptian President Anwar Sadatx2019;s normalisation with Israel. Bear in mind that Saudi Arabia, unlike Egypt, does not seek to liberate territories from Israeli occupation and desires no aid from the United States.
Four decades laterx2026;
Forty years ago this week, then-Egyptian President Anwar Sadat made a diplomatic splash when he visited Israel and spoke to the Knesset. It broke axA0;psychological barrier in the Arab world,xA0;marked a turning point in the conflict withxA0;Israel, and saw the beginningxA0;of Egyptx2019;s officialxA0;normalisation of relations with Israel. 
Sadat cemented thatxA0;process into a cold peacexA0;the following year, signing the Camp David accords, whichxA0;guaranteed the return of occupied SinaixA0;and billions of dollars in aid from the US,xA0;but neglected the occupied territories of the rest of the Arabs, including the Palestinians.
A militant Egyptian group assassinated Sadat during a military parade three years later, but his successor Hosni Mubarak continued to honour the agreement. Sinai was returned and the aid came through, butxA0;the biggerxA0;promise of modernisation, openness and peace dividend never really materialised, certainly not for ordinary Egyptians.

Egyptian President Anwar Sadat shakes hands with Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin in the Knesset on November 20, 1977 Shmuel Rachmani/AP

For the people of Egypt, normalisation with Israel never became normal. The Egyptian people remained mostly hostile or indifferent towards their neighbour to the north. And Palestine continued to be a rallying cause forxA0;Egyptian civil society, in their pursuit of justice and freedom from repression.
But for Israel, normalisation was a bounty.xA0;With its southern flanks secured,xA0;itxA0;began a large campaign of repression against Palestinians and escalation of its illegal settlement activities in occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied Palestinian territories.xA0;Israel annexed the occupied Syrian Golan Heights in 1981. And in 1982, it invaded Lebanon to crush the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Lebanese National Movement, which led to tens of thousands of casualties. It maintained its occupation of southern Lebanon for the next 18 years. Israelx2019;s status was elevated soon after from US regional ally to global x201C;strategic assetx201D;.
Forty years ago, there was no Palestinian Hamas and no Lebanese Hezbollah, no al-Qaeda and ISIL, and no Islamic Republic of Iran.xA0;But soon after the Camp David accords, Israeli aggression paved the way for the rise of Hamas and Hezbollah, just as Soviet and US aggression x2013; coupled with Arab discord x2013; plunged the region into chaos and paved the way for the rise of militant Islamists.
Betraying Palestine
The lessons couldnx2019;t be clearer. Arab autocrats, who fail in governance and in war, also fail in peace and normalisation. 
Normalisation through weakness is the exact opposite of peace through strength, and therefore, is destined to fail. It is an idea that is tinged with betrayal: betrayal of common Arab interests, as well asxA0;the betrayal of Palestine.
For the people of the Arab world, Palestine has long been a rallying cause because itx2019;s about more than geography or a homelandxA0;for thexA0;Palestinian people. Palestine is the test of Arab conscience,xA0;the symbol of the struggle for freedom, not only from military occupation, but also from political repression at home.
Those whoxA0;shed tears over Arab unity and national security in Cairo this week are the very regimes cooperating with Israel in secret. Their incompetence has paved the way for Israel, Iran and the US to run amok in the region.
When the regional hysteria finally ceases, when the hallucination subsides, history will cast a harsh judgment on the cynics who normalise with Israel at the expense of Palestine.xA0;
