Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi has met in Cairo the deputy head of Sudanx2019;s ruling Transitional Military Council TMC,xA0;General Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo, whose forcesxA0;have been accused of carrying out a brutal crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in June.
Dagalo, who is widely known as Hemeti and is seen as the most powerful of the generals now running Sudan, x201C;presented the latest developments on the current situationx201D;, the Egyptian presidency said after Mondayx2019;s meeting in the capital.
El-Sisi, a former army chief, reiterated Egyptx2019;s x201C;strategic supportx201D; in maintaining x201C;the stability and securityx201D; of its neighbour, Sudan, the presidency added.
Egyptx2018;s government has been a strong backer of the TMC after the military overthrew longtime President Omar al-Bashir on April 11 in the wake of months-long mass protests against his three-decade autocratic rule.
Hemeti, the commander of the Rapid Support Forces RSF x2013; the feared paramilitary group accused of war crimes in Darfur under al-Bashir x2013; has also shored up support from Gulf allies, meeting Saudi Arabiax2019;s Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman in May.
His meeting with el-Sisi came a day before talks between the TMC and the protest leaders were set to resume.
On July 17, the two sides signed a power-sharing deal aimed at forming a joint civilian-military ruling body which, in turn, would install civilian rule. The negotiations on Tuesday are meant to iron out remaining issues between the two sides.
Protesters killed
The protests in SudanxA0;were triggered in December following the tripling of the price of bread but quicklyxA0;transformed into a challenge to al-Bashirx2019;s rule.xA0;Demonstrations continued after his removal as protesters intensified their demands for a transition to civilian rule.

190728062135797

On June 3, at least 127 demonstrators were killed and scores wounded in a raid on a sit-in, the rallying point in the protest movementx2019;s struggle for democracy, according to doctors linked to the protest movement.
A joint probe by prosecutors and the TMC on Saturday said that security forces, including an RSF general, took part in the raid on the protest camp outside the military headquarters in the capital, Khartoum, despite having no orders from their superiors to do so.
Hemeti has consistently denied that his men were involved in the crackdown, which triggered international outrage.
On Sunday, Sudanese police fired tear gas at scores of protesters demanding an independent probe into the June raid.
Separately, the doctorsx2019; committee linked to the protest movement said on Monday that five protesters, including four students, were shot dead and several wounded at a rally in a town in central Sudan.
x201C;Five martyrs succumbed to direct wounds from sniper bullets during a peaceful rally in al-Obeid,x201D; the committee said in a statement.
The reason for the rally was not immediately clear.
