Washington, DC x2013; It is becoming a near-daily occurrence. Leaks from inside US President Donald Trumpx2019;s White House have both riled and undermined its current occupant and his administration.
But a Wednesday opinion piece in The New York Times, penned anonymously by a senior administration official who is highly critical of Trump, has taken leaking to a new level.
Leaks are nothing new at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue. US President Richard Nixonx2019;s Justice Department took The New York Times and Washington Post to court over the Pentagon Papers, leaked documents showing the US had doubts about its military intervention in Vietnam.xA0;
Former President George W Bushx2019;s White House was rocked by scandal after the identity of CIA operative Valerie Plame was leaked to the media following her husbandx2019;s criticism of the administrationx2019;s justification for the 2003 invasion of Iraq.xA0;

articleGUID

Still, the latest op-ed is unprecedented, something the Times noted in its preamble to the piece. It follows 20 months of constant revelations that continue to surprise.
Here are the top six leaks from the Trump White House:
1 Michael Flynn meets the Russians
Less than a month into his presidency, Trump was forced to fire his national security adviser Michael Flynn.
The whole controversy started after leaks to the media that Flynn had spoken with the Russian ambassador during the transition time between the election and the inauguration, an interaction that raised questions about the Trump teamx2019;s improper contact with foreign governments.
For weeks, Trump and White House officials denied Flynn had ever spoken with the Russian government. Vice President Mike Pence even made a TV appearance on CBS denying it.
But the leaks didnx2019;t stop and eventually, the White House was forced to admit Flynn had spoken with the Russians, a move Trump eventually praised during a press conference on February 16, 2017. Trump complained publicly about the number of leaks around the story sayingxA0;x201C;itx2019;s an illegal process and the press should be ashamed of themselvesx201D;.xA0; 
Flynn later pleaded guilty to lying to the FBI in the investigation into whether or not the Russians interfered in the 2016 US election. 
2 Trump calls Africa a x2018;s**tholex2019;
It was an off-hand remark heard around the world. In a closed-door White House meeting on immigration in January with both Republican and Democratic legislators, Trump sparked a furious reactionxA0;from world leaders after a leaked quote made it out of the discussion.xA0;

articleGUID

Trump allegedly asked aloud,xA0;x201C;Why are we having all these people from s**thole countries come here?x201D;xA0;According to people present, Trump was referring to Africa, El Salvador and Haiti. He reportedly asked why the US wasnx2019;t allowing more people from countries such as Norway, according to the Washington Post account of the meeting. 
Democratic Senator Dick Durbin, who was present, confirmed the remarks for reporters, saying Trump said them x201C;repeatedlyx201D;. 
Others denied it, but itxA0;didnx2019;t matter.
The condemnation was swift, with opponents calling Trumpx2019;s remarks x201C;racistx201D;, forcing Trump to clarify that while he used x201C;toughx201D; language during the meeting, he never said the word x201C;s**tholex201D;. 
3 Fire and Fury
There have been and will continue to be many books written about the Trump administration. But the biggest bombshell so far came in January when author Michael Wolffx2019;sxA0; Fire and FuryxA0;hit the shelves a year into the Trump presidency. For months leading up to its publication, Wolff was given extraordinary access to the White House and the book included both on-the-record and leaked conversations with some of the presidentx2019;s top lieutenants. 

articleGUID

Overall,xA0;Fire and FuryxA0;paints a White House in constant chaos, with backstabbing and factional fighting that was not only witnessed but reportedly encouraged by Trump. 
The president called it x201C;a phony bookx201D; and x201C;full of liesx201D;. One passage includes a conversation with former top adviser Steve Bannon who called a June 2016 meeting between Donald Trump Junior and Russians with ties to the Kremlin x201C;treasonousx201D;. Bannon later apologised publicly for his comments. 
4 Trump talks with Mexico and Australia
In August 2017, the Washington Post leaked two separate conversationsxA0;between Trump and the leaders of Mexico and Australia. Rather than deny the conversations ever took place, White House officials attacked the Post for publishing them. The transcripts reveal the presidentx2019;s early attempts to change the US trade relationship with Mexico and deeply concerned about his public image on an assortment of other issues.
During the conversation with former Mexican President Enrique Pena Nieto, Trump addressed his biggest campaign promise to build a wall along the US-Mexican border and make the Mexicans pay for it.
Pena Nieto told Trump his country would never pay for the wall. xA0;
x201C;You cannot say that to the press,x201D; Trump told him. x201C;The press is going to go with that and I cannot live with that.x201D;xA0;
In a conversation with former Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull, Trump railed against a deal the US made under his predecessor, Barack Obama, to allow some refugees held by Australia into the United States. 
x201C;This shows me to be a dope,x201D; Trump told Turnbull in a tense exchange. x201C;I am the worldx2019;s greatest person that does not want to let people into the country.x201D; He later told Turnbull their conversation was x201C;the most unpleasant call all dayx201D;.
5 Comey and Trump x2013; duelling leaks
In May 2017, Trump fired FBI director James Comey whose agents were investigating the presidentx2019;s campaign over improper, and potentially illegal, contact with the Russian government during the 2016 election.
As Trump faced a furious backlash over the firing and charges of obstructing justice, he threatened to leak x201C;tapesx201D; of his conversations with Comey. Within days, a story leaked that, while Comey was still FBI director, Trump had asked him to let go of an investigation into Michael Flynnx2019;s contact with the Russians. 

James Comey better hope that there are no quot;tapesquot; of our conversations before he starts leaking to the press!
x2014; Donald J. Trump realDonaldTrump May 12, 2017

A month later, during a Senate Intelligence Committee hearing, Comey revealed that, in fact, he was the one who leaked a de-classified memo of the conversation to the press after Trumpx2019;s threat of x201C;tapesx201D;. Comey said he did it because he hoped it would prompt the appointment of a special counsel to look into the mounting accusations that Trump campaign officials colluded with Moscow.
Thatx2019;s exactly what happened.
Less than a week later, former FBI Director Robert Mueller was appointedxA0;to the job. His investigation has netted four Trump campaign officials and led to the indictments of more than two dozen Russian citizens.

articleGUID

The White House later admitted that, contrary to Trumpx2019;s assertions, there were no x201C;tapesx201D; of the Comey conversations.
6 Trump reveals Kim Jong-un meeting
One of the most overlooked themes in this particular administration is that often the leaks are not only coming from inside the White House but inside the Oval Office itself. Unlike previous administrations, the president seems eager to be the first person to reveal any big news, often via Twitter, no matter how sensitive.
Case in point, the stunning revelation that Trump would meet North Korean leader Kim Jong-un. In March, a South Korean delegation came to the White House to brief officials about a meeting with the North Korean government, with which the US has no formal diplomatic relations. What many journalists didnx2019;t know at the time was they brought a message from Kim to Trump.

The highly anticipated meeting between Kim Jong Un and myself will take place in Singapore on June 12th. We will both try to make it a very special moment for World Peace!
x2014; Donald J. Trump realDonaldTrump May 10, 2018

In a surprise appearance that afternoon, Trump popped his head into the briefing room, an unorthodox move even for him. He told a handful of confused journalists there would be a big announcement by the South Koreans later that day.
Sure enough, that evening, the South Korean delegation emerged from the West Wing and told the world about the request for an historic meeting with Kim.
On June 12th, Trump became the first sitting US president to meet a North Korean leader when he shook hands with Kim in Singapore.
