Donald Trump has said he will leave the White House if the Electoral College certifies Joe Biden as the winner of the November 3 presidential election, the closest the United States president has come to conceding the contest.
After a Thanksgiving videoconference with members of the US military on Thursday, Trump was asked if he would leave the White House if Biden, the US president-elect, officially wins the Electoral College vote.
x201C;Certainly, I will. Certainly, I will. And you know that,x201D; Trump replied.
Major news agencies called the race for Biden earlier this month, saying the former US vice president had secured 306 Electoral College votes compared with Trumpx2019;s 232.
A candidate must gain 270 electoral votes to win the presidency.
Electoral College voters, known as electors, are scheduled to meet on December 14. Electors mostly vote based on the outcome of the presidential race in their states.
US President Donald Trump continues to insist that x2018;massive fraudx2019; marred the presidential election, but has offered no evidence to back up his claims Erin Scott/ReutersDespite his comments, Trump remained defiant on Thursday, reiterating unfounded claims that the election was marred by x201C;massive fraudx201D;.
He offered no concrete evidence of widespread voting irregularities.
Trump also said officials in key states that he lost were x201C;communistsx201D; and x201C;enemies of the statex201D;.
He declined to say whether he would attend Bidenx2019;s inauguration, scheduled for January 20, but said he intends to hold a rally in the US state of Georgia on December 5 in support of two Republican Senate candidates there.
The result of those election runoffs will decide which party gets a majority in the US Senate.
The Trump campaign has refused to recognise Biden as the outright winner of the presidential race, filing lawsuits in several key states and stymying Bidenx2019;s transition efforts.
Most of the Trump campaign challenges focused on allegations of voter fraud and have been dismissed by courts. Michiganx2019;s certification of its results on Tuesday appeared to seal Trumpx2019;s losing fate.
On November 6, Biden campaign spokesman Andrew Bates hinted that Trump could be removed should he refuse to leave office, saying the US government x201C;is perfectly capable of escorting trespassers out of the White Housex201D;.
