After the third and final US presidential debate, most opinion articles and mainstream television commentators continued to focus predominantly on Donald Trumpx2019;s violent racism and Hilary Clintonx2019;s corporate cronyism.
Only on rare occasions is the possible presidency of either candidate compared with Barack Obamax2019;s presidency, and it seems doubtful either would do a better job than the outgoing president, who himself has disappointed many by his relentless use of drones and vicious war against whistle-blowers.























Inside Story x2013; Clinton vs Trump: Where do they stand on Palestine?





 At the same time, little is said about the election and the potential impact of its outcome on the entire world. US elections are objects of intense scrutiny on every continent, and this is not simply because of the millions of dollars involved in the campaigns or our fascination with US politics but rather because they affect our lives at least as much, if not more, than the lives of American citizens. 
 Asking that everyone in the world be allowed to vote on November 8 does not reveal any particular concern for American politics but rather constitutes a demand for some say in our own lives, given the global consequences of these national political contest. But how much authority does the United States still exercise? 
x2018;The leader of the free worldx2019;
 Although many claim that US supremacy has diminished with the rise of new powers such as China and India and the formation of economic blocs such as the European Union and BRICS Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa, the US x201C;still largely sets the terms for global discoursex201D;. 
 This discourse, as Noam Chomsky recently explained, ranges x201C;from such concerns as Israel-Palestine, Iran, Latin America, the x2018;war on terrorx2019;, international economic organisation, rights and justice, and others like them, to the ultimate issues of survival of civilization x2013; nuclear war and environmental destruction.x201D;

The winner of this election will become, as we are accustomed to reading in the press, the apos;leader of the free worldapos; and of a nation that apos;is on the right side of historyapos;.
 


 With more than 800 bases in more than 80 countries and no foreign base on US soil or close to its borders, as Commander in Chief the next president will have at his or her disposal, as David Vine reported, x201C;more military bases in foreign lands than any other people, nation, or empire in history.x201D; 
 The yearly defence budget of the United States x2013; $597bn x2013;xA0;is equal to the budgets of next 14 big defence spenders put together. 
 US elections: Why no mention of Afghan war? 
The winner of this election will become, as we are accustomed to reading in the press, the x201C;leader of the free worldx201D; and of a nation that x201C;is on the right side of historyx201C;.
But it is the next president who will decide not only how free the world is but also which one is the right side of history. There are many examples of the US clearly standing against freedom Honduras or on the wrong side of history Rwanda, but the upcoming referendumxA0;in Italy is a good illustration of both, as it directly involves the vote of a sovereign nation that happens to be within the so-called free world.
Free from US interference
A few weeks ago Obama hosted the last state dinner of his presidency. Among the many politicians invited, Italian prime minister Mateo Renzi received particular attention, as he is in the middle of a political storm that could end his career and harm US investment.
Renzi is desperately promoting a change to 47 of 139 articles of the Italian constitution. According to many Italian law professors and constitutional experts, this is a counterproductive reform as the Italian senate would no longer be elected directly by the citizens, among many other changes.
 It is curious that Obama would endorse this reform given that it is the x201C;reverse of the 17th Amendment in the US, which gives American citizens the right to directly elect their senatorsx201D;, as the law professor Luca Baccelli points out. Why is Obama endorsing a reform that undermines democratic rights historically secured in his own country?
 OPINION: Is America on the right side of history? 
The introductory report on the proposed reforms specifies x201C;the need to adapt the domestic legal system to the recent evolution of the European economic governance x2026; and to its cogent budget rulesx201D; as well as x201C;the challenges coming from the internalization of economy and the changed context of global competition.x201D;
That is, the proposed constitutional changes are aimed at overcoming widespread popular opposition to the TIPP agreement.
x201C;We both reaffirmedx201D;, Obama said at the press conference before the dinner, x201C;our strong support for negotiations around the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, which can support jobs and exports and innovation and growth on both sides of the Atlantic.x201D;



A defeat for Renzi in the referendum on December 4 will hurt, as US ambassador John Phillips recently said, Italyx2019;s ability to attract American investment.
 In Italy then, how free and on which side of history the nation will be after this vital vote is determined by the US president.
If Italians, as well as Iraqis and Mexicans, could also vote for the only world leader who can truly influence their lives, perhaps the next leader of the free world would be more likely to allow that world to be free from US interference. 
 Santiago ZabalaxA0;is ICREA research professor of philosophy at the Pompeu Fabra University in Barcelona. 
 The views expressed in this article are the authorx2019;s own and do not necessarily reflect Al Jazeerax2019;s editorial policy. 
