The resignation of prominent investigative journalist Glenn Greenwald from The Intercept has once again catapulted the alleged overseas business dealings of United States presidential candidate Joe Bidenx2019;s son Hunter into the spotlight.
Greenwald accused his editors at The Intercept, a news outlet he cofounded, of censoring an article he wrote, x201C;based on recently revealed emails and witness testimonyx201D; that x201C;raised critical questionsx201D; about Democrat Joe Bidenx2019;s conduct.
The Interceptx2019;s editor-in-chief denies Greenwald was censored.
The high-profile departure of a journalist who built his career combatting media oppression is the latest flashpoint in a controversy that has engulfed Twitter and Facebook, and stoked criticisms of anti-conservative bias by x201C;mainstream mediax201D; and the guardians of social media platforms.
Herex2019;s what you need to know about Hunter Bidenx2019;s emails, the connections with Ukraine and China, and the mudslinging so far.
First of all, what is Hunter Biden accused of?
The US former vice presidentx2019;s son is accused of working to set up business deals in Ukraine and China that traded on his famous familyx2019;s name and peddling influence with his father.
What kind of alleged deals?
One involves the Ukrainian energy firm Burisma, where Hunter Biden served on the board while his dad was serving as vice president in the administration of former US President Barack Obama. Other allegations involve negotiations between Hunter, his uncle, James Biden, and a Chinese energy and finance company called CEFC China Energy.
How did all of this come to light?
The New York Post published what it claimed were emails between Hunter Biden and Vadym Pozharskyi, an advisor to Burisma, from April 2015 in which they discuss setting up a meeting between Pozharskyi and then-Vice President Joe Biden.
Itx2019;s not clear from the wording of the email whether the meeting ever took place, and the vice presidentx2019;s official schedule doesnx2019;t show any record of a meeting with Pozharskyi, according to Bidenx2019;s campaign.
The Post also published an email that allegedly showed Hunter Bidenx2019;s efforts to set up an investment venture in 2017 involving Chinese oil company CEFC China Energy Co.
How did the Post get the emails?
The Post says it received a hard drive with the emails on it from US President Donald Trumpx2019;s lawyer, Rudy Giuliani, who has himself faced allegations of corrupt dealings with Ukraine.
The emails were allegedly found on a laptop left at a computer repair store in Delaware in April 2019, but the shopx2019;s owner hasnx2019;t been able to definitively say the computer belonged to Hunter Biden.
So are the emails true?
One of Hunter Bidenx2019;s former business partners, Anthony Bobulinski, confirmed in a statement to several news outlets including conservative-leaning Fox News that one of the emails published by the Post that lists him as a recipient is x201C;genuinex201D;.
Which email was that?
The email discussed the allocation of equity in the CEFC investment venture. Dated May 13, 2017 x2013; when Biden was not in office nor running for president x2013; the email mentioned a 10 percent stake x201C;held by H for the big guy.x201D;
Bobulinski said during a press conference organised by the Trump campaign that x201C;the big guyx201D; was a reference to Joe Biden.
Has anyone else verified the emails as definitively true or false?
No, but dozens of retired US intelligence officials signed a letter stating that while they do not know if the emails purportedly belonging to Hunter Biden are genuine or not, they have x201C;all the classic earmarks of a Russian information operationx201D;.
What do the Bidens say about the allegations?
Joe Biden maintains he has x201C;never spoken to my son about his overseas business dealingsx201D; and that the meeting with Pozharskyi never took place.
Hunter Biden has maintained he did nothing wrong when it came to Burisma, but admitted in a 2019 interview it was x201C;poor judgment on my partx201D; to sit on the companyx2019;s board while his father was in the White House.
Neither Hunter nor the Biden campaign has spoken about whether the laptop with the emails belonged to Hunter, but a lawyer for the vice presidentx2019;s son, George Mesires, said in a statement that x201C;we have no idea where this came from, and certainly cannot credit anything that Rudy Giuliani provided to the NY Post,x201D; the Associated Press reported.
At the final presidential debate with Donald Trump on October 22, Biden said: x201C;I have not taken a penny from any foreign source ever in my life.x201D;
Did Burisma and CEFC China Energy get anything in return?
Trump alleges that Joe Bidenx2019;s pressure on Ukraine to fire a prosecutor while Biden was vice president was a move to help Burisma. But a report by Senate Republicans found that while Hunterx2019;s position on Burismax2019;s board may have posed a conflict of interest, there was no evidence it influenced US policy towards the country and that the firing of the prosecutor was in line with the Obama administrationx2019;s anti-corruption foreign policy towards Ukraine, according to the Associated Press.
No deal was struck between Hunter and James Biden and CEFC China Energy, a Wall Street Journal investigation found, and text messages and emails x201C;related to the venture that were provided to the Journal by Mr Bobulinskix201D; did not show either Hunter Biden or James Biden discussing a role for Joe Biden in the venture.
So why does this story just keep going?
Trump has made slamming Hunter Biden and accusing his father of corruption a hallmark of his campaign, and relishes bringing the accusations up on the campaign trail. And criticisms from Republicans and right-leaning news outlets that more liberal-leaning news outlets have ignored the story and tech giants have suppressed it has only fuelled the fire.
Suppressed it? How?
After the Post published its story on the alleged emails, Twitter temporarily blocked users from sharing it, arguing it violated the platformx2019;s policy on hacked information. Facebook also worked to limit the spread of the story. Republicans say itx2019;s evidence of the platformsx2019; anti-conservative bias, which landed tech CEOs in a Senate committeex2019;s hot seat this week.
Where did the Senate hearing lead?
Republican Senator Ted Cruz of Texas grilled Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey and Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg about the story during a hearing on the liability shield that tech companies currently have when it comes to content that users post on their platforms. Another hearing on alleged censorship of conservatives on social media is planned for after the election.
Yikes. What a tangled mess. Will it impact the US election results?
That remains to be seen. But Greenwaldx2019;s resignation has reignited the controversy around how news outlets have handled the story x2013; and highlighted the partisan divide in the US over just about everything.
