US House Democrats on Tuesday introduced two articles of impeachment against Donald Trump, charging the president with abuse of power and obstruction of Congress.xA0;
Democrats launched their impeachment inquiry into Trump in September following a whistle-blower complaint that centred on a July 25 phone call between the US president and his Ukrainian counterpart Volodymyr Zelenskyy. During the call, Trump asks Zelenskyy to investigate former Vice President Joe Biden, a 2020 Democratic presidential frontrunner, and his son, Hunter, who had served on the board of a Ukrainian gas company. Trump also wanted an investigation into a debunked conspiracy theory that Ukraine, not Russia, interfered in the 2016 elections.xA0;
At the time of the call, the Trump administration was withholding $391m in military assistance from Ukraine.xA0;
Trump has denied any wrongdoing and has refused to participate in the investigation. The White House has directed members of the presidentx2019;s administration not to cooperate with the inquiry.xA0;
The House Judiciary Committee is expected by the end of the week to vote to recommend the articles of impeachment to the full House. The House will likely vote on the formal charges by Christmas, December 25. If Trump is impeached, a trial will be held in the Senate where a conviction is unlikely.xA0;




Read the full text of the articles of impeachment below.





Impeaching Donald John Trump, President of the United States, for high crimes and misdemeanors.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Mr. NADLER submitted the following resolution; which was referred to the Committee on
RESOLUTION
Impeaching Donald John Trump, President of the United States, for high crimes and misdemeanors.
Resolved, That Donald J. Trump, President of the United States, is impeached for high crimes and misdemeanors and that the following articles of impeachment be exhibited to the United States Senate:
Articles of impeachment exhibited by the House of Representatives of the United States of America in the name of itself and of the people of the United States of America, against Donald J. Trump, President of the United States of America, in maintenance and support of its impeachment against him for high crimes and misdemeanors.
ARTICLE I: ABUSE OF POWER
The Constitution provides that the House of Representatives x201C;shall have the sole Power of Impeachmentx201D; and that the President x201C;shall be removed from Office on Impeachment for, and Conviction of, Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanorsx201D;. In his conduct of the office of President of the United Statesx2014;and in violation of his constitutional oath faithfully to execute the office of President of the United States and, to the best of his ability, preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution of the United States, and in violation of his constitutional duty to take care that the laws be faithfully executedx2014;Donald J. Trump has abused the powers of the Presidency, in that:
Using the powers of his high office, President Trump solicited the interference of a foreign government, Ukraine, in the 2020 United States Presidential election. He did so through a scheme or course of conduct that included soliciting the Government of Ukraine to publicly announce investigations that would benefit his reelection, harm the election prospects of a political opponent, and influence the 2020 United States Presidential election to his advantage. President Trump also sought to pressure the Government of Ukraine to take these steps by conditioning official United States Government acts of significant value to Ukraine on its public announcement of the investigations. President Trump engaged in this scheme or course of conduct for corrupt purposes in pursuit of personal political benefit. In so doing, President Trump used the powers of the Presidency in a manner that compromised the national security of the United States and undermined the integrity of the United States democratic process. He thus ignored and injured the interests of the Nation.
President Trump engaged in this scheme or course of conduct through the following means:xA0;
1 President Trump x2013; acting both directly and through his agents Within and Outside the United States Government x2013; corruptly solicited the Government of Ukraine to publicly announce investigations into x2013;
A a political opponent, former Vice President Joseph R. Biden, Jr.; and
B a discredited theory promoted by Russia alleging that Ukraine x2013; rather than Russia x2013; interfered in the 2016 United States Presidential election.
2 With the same corrupt motives, President Trump x2013; acting both directly and through his agents within and outside the United States Government x2013; conditioned two official acts on the public announcements that he had requested x2013;
A the release of $391 million of United States taxpayer funds that Congress had appropriated on a bipartisan basis for the purpose of providing vital military and security assistance to Ukraine to oppose Russian aggression and which President Trump had ordered suspended; and
B a head of state meeting at the White House, which the President of Ukraine sought to demonstrate continued United States support for the Government of Ukraine in the face of Russian aggression.
3 Faced with the public revelation of his actions, President Trump ultimately released the military and security assistance to the Government of Ukraine, but has persisted in openly and corruptly urging and soliciting Ukraine to undertake investigations for his personal political benefit.
These actions were consistent with President Trumpx2019;s previous invitations of foreign interference in United States elections.
In all of this, President Trump abused the powers of the Presidency by ignoring and injuring national security and other vital national interests to obtain an improper personal political benefit. He has also betrayed the Nation by abusing his high office to enlist a foreign power in corrupting democratic elections.
Wherefore President Trump, by such conduct, has demonstrated that he will remain a threat to national security and the Constitution if allowed to remain in office, and has acted in a manner grossly incompatible with self-governance and the rule of law. President Trump thus warrants impeachment and trial, removal from office, and disqualification to hold and enjoy any Office of honor, trust, or profit under the United States.
ARTICLE II: OBSTRUCTION OF CONGRESS
The Constitution provides that the House of Representatives x201C;shall have the sole Power of Impeachmentx201D; and that the President x201C;shall be removed from Office on Impeachment for, and Conviction of, Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanorsx201D;. In his conduct of the office of President of the United States x2013; and in violation of his constitutional oath faithfully to execute the office of President of the United States and, to the best of his ability, preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution of the United States, and in violation of his constitutional duty to take care that the laws be faithfully executed x2013; Donald J. Trump has directed the unprecedented, categorical, and indiscriminate defiance of subpoenas issued by the House of Representatives pursuant to its x201C;sole Power of Impeachmentx201D;. President Trump has abused the powers of the Presidency in a manner offensive to, and subversive of, the Constitution, in that:
The House of Representatives has engaged in an impeachment inquiry focused on President Trumpx2019;s corrupt solicitation of the Government of Ukraine to interfere in the 2020 United States Presidential election. As part of this impeachment inquiry, the Committees undertaking the investigation served subpoenas seeking documents and testimony deemed vital to the inquiry from various Executive Branch agencies and offices, and current and former officials.
In response, without lawful cause or excuse, President Trump directed Executive Branch agencies, offices, and officials not to comply with those subpoenas. President Trump thus interposed the powers of the Presidency against the lawful subpoenas of the House of Representatives, and assumed to himself functions and judgments necessary to the exercise of the x201C;sole Power of Impeachmentx201D; vested by the Constitution in the House of Representatives.
President Trump abused the powers of his high office through the following means:
1 Directing the White House to defy a lawful subpoena by withholding the production of documents sought therein by the Committees.
2 Directing other Executive Branch agencies and offices to defy lawful subpoenas and withhold the production of documents and records from the Committees x2013; in response to which the Department of State, Office of Management and Budget, Department of Energy, and Department of Defense refused to produce a single document or record.
3 Directing current and former Executive Branch officials not to cooperate with the Committees x2013; in response to which nine Administration officials defied subpoenas for testimony, namely John Michael x201C;Mickx201D; Mulvaney, Robert B. Blair, John A. Eisenberg, Michael Ellis, Preston Wells Griffith, Russell T. Vought, Michael Duffey, Brian McCormack, and T. Ulrich Brechbuhl.
These actions were consistent with President Trumpx2019;s previous efforts to undermine United States Government investigations into foreign interference in United States elections.
Through these actions, President Trump sought to arrogate to himself the right to determine the propriety, scope, and nature of an impeachment inquiry into his own conduct, as well as the unilateral prerogative to deny any and all information to the House of Representatives in the exercise of its x201C;sole Power of Impeachmentx201D;. In the history of the Republic, no President has ever ordered the complete defiance of an impeachment inquiry or sought to obstruct and impede so comprehensively the ability of the House of Representatives to investigate x201C;high Crimes and Misdemeanorsx201D;. This abuse of office served to cover up the Presidentx2019;s own repeated misconduct and to seize and control the power of impeachmentx2014;and thus to nullify a vital constitutional safeguard vested solely in the House of Representatives.
In all of this, President Trump has acted in a manner contrary to his trust as President and subversive of constitutional government, to the great prejudice of the cause of law and justice, and to the manifest injury of the people of the United States.
Wherefore, President Trump, by such conduct, has demonstrated that he will remain a threat to the Constitution if allowed to remain in office, and has acted in a manner grossly incompatible with self-governance and the rule of law. President Trump thus warrants impeachment and trial, removal from office, and disqualification to hold and enjoy any office of honor, trust, or profit under the United States.
See the original document here.xA0;
