America has voted. While the official result is still pending, most experts concur: Joe Biden will become the 46th president of the United States.
The soon-to-be commander-in-chief never left any doubt about his plans to bring about a paradigm shift in policy, domestically, as well as on the international stage: A goodbye to President Donald Trumpx2019;s x201C;America Firstx201D;, that, according to Biden, x201C;has made America alonex201D;, and a hello to multilateralism and pushing respect for normative values.
The latter is of particular relevance for the Middle East and will alter the regionx2019;s status quo.
Biden is expected to continue the USx2019;s withdrawal from the region, even more so since championing a return to a more conventional foreign policy that is likely to play second fiddle to domestic emergencies such as the coronavirus pandemic and an American economy on its knees.
Nonetheless, Biden will make his presence felt in the Middle East.
Iran
Trump withdrew from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action JCPOA, commonly known as the Iran nuclear deal, in 2018.
In lieu of diplomatic efforts, his administration applied a x201C;maximum pressurex201D; campaign x2013; an attempt to coerce Tehran into renegotiating the deal entirely.
Biden sees this approach as a x201C;dangerous failurex201D; and has repeatedly praised the deal and pledged to reverse Trumpx2019;s withdrawal, x201C;if Iran moves back into compliance with its nuclear obligationsx201D;, as he told the Council on Foreign Relations in 2019.















Biden seeks to make the Iranian government more predictable by reintegrating it into interrelationships. Moreover, Biden also seeks to send a signal to the world and its allies that the US is x201C;a partner whose word can be relied onx201D; x2013; a sentiment not felt by many in the international community as of late.
However, an end to the stringent US stance towards a detente is not straight forward. For one, Iran will presumably demand compensation for the economic downfall the sanctions caused, Tehran University professor Hassan Ahmadian has argued.
Mistrust is another factor.
x201C;You cannot trust Democrats,x201D; a hardliner official close to the office of Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei reportedly said.
Moreover, Senate Republicans and Americax2019;s main allies in the region, Israel and Saudi Arabia, will oppose the USx2019;s re-entering the nuclear deal with Iran, according to Ellie Geranmayeh of the European Council on Foreign Relations.
Iranx2019;s current economic situation is a factor pushing it to seek an amicable solution. However, with upcoming Iranian presidential elections in mid-2021 and Bidenx2019;s domestic focus on the pandemic, talks should not be expected to start anytime soon.
Iranian armed forces march during the National Army Day parade in Tehran, Iran September 22, 2019 WANA via Reuters
Regional conflicts
Bidenx2019;s strategy for the broader Middle East region remains unclear. Experts cannot conclude whether or not Biden will proceed with the US withdrawal that began under president Barrack Obama and reached its apogee under Trump.
However, what appears certain is the years of interventionism are over. Biden does not seem to be interested in nation-building or toppling governments.
What is known is that Biden has pledged to not withdraw all remaining troops but to maintain a small military presence in northeast Syria while continuing sanctions on the government of President Bashar al-Assad x2013; similar to Trumpx2019;s approach.
Biden has also made it clear that any Middle East entanglements must concern American interests first and foremost.
In terms of Afghanistan, Bidenx2019;s online campaign manifesto states he will x201C;bring the vast majority of our troops home from Afghanistan and narrowly focus our mission on al-Qaeda and ISIS ISILx201D;, two armed groups that have remained a x201C;cohesive threatx201D;, according to Anthony Cordesman of the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
Hence, wherever American security interests are not at stake, US soldiers are unlikely to play a significant role.
A woman walks past a poster of Syriax2019;s President Bashar al-Assad in Damascus File: Yamam al-Shaar/AP
Human rights
Biden has pledged to reverse what many consider to be the cornerstone of Trumpx2019;s foreign policy: ignoring autocracy and human rights violations in favour of realpolitik.
After the murder of Jamal Khashoggi, a critic of Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salmanx2019;s MBS policies, Trump expressed only cautious criticism of MBS and his role in the killing, even after the CIA concluded he had ordered Khashoggix2019;s death.
It is precisely the x201C;dangerous blank chequex201D; for Saudi Arabia that Biden condemned in the past.
As president, Biden announced on the second anniversary of the Khashoggi murder in early October, he would review US relations with Saudi Arabia and defend the rights of activists, political dissidents, and journalists, before vowing to no longer leave American values x201C;x200B;x200B;at the cloakroom to sell weapons or buy oilx201D;.
The latter also applies to the war in Yemen, which has devastated millions and remains a humanitarian catastrophe. Bidenx2019;s pledge to cease US arms shipments for Saudi Arabiax2019;s war could profoundly impact MBS.
Diplomatic sources were quoted recently as saying a Biden administration would not put US-Saudi relations to the test, but the unconditional support from the White House that MBS is used to could now depend on the kingdomx2019;s willingness to advance in questions of human rights.















Israel-Palestine
x201C;The best friend Israel ever in the White House,x201D; Benjamin Netanyahu said of Trump. And not without sound reasons, as the gifts from Washington were plentiful.
Trump fulfilled his campaign promise to relocate the American embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, and his Middle East plan was also widely considered advantageous towards Israel.
The White House also ceased financial contributions to the Palestinian Authority and its share towards UN Palestine aid.
Most recently, Trump brokered two x201C;normalisationx201D; deals between Israel and the United Arab Emirates UAE and Bahrain that have strengthened Israelx2019;s position and isolated the Palestinians further.
Nonetheless, experts do not expect the modus operandi to change significantly under Biden. While the president-elect has already stated he would not move the embassy back to Tel Aviv, he will also not reverse Trumpx2019;s recognition of Israelx2019;s sovereignty over the Golan Heights either, a senior Biden campaign official stated on Tuesday.
Moreover, Biden has also vehemently opposed pro-Palestinian initiatives from within his party. During the Democratic primaries, Senator Bernie Sanders suggested the US ought to utilise its Israel support as leverage and demand concessions for the Palestinians.
Bidenx2019;s response was concise as it was unmistakable: x201C;ridiculous and unacceptablex201D;, he called Sandersx2019; idea.
Bidenx2019;s reaction to the UAE-Israel deal also displayed his support for Israel. He called the deal a x201C;historic breakthroughx201D; and promised to persuade more countries in the region to sign similar agreements.
What sets Biden apart is his pledge to reverse Trumpx2019;s withdrawal of economic and humanitarian assistance from the Palestinians and his pursuit to reopen the Palestinian Liberation Organizationx2019;s mission in Washington, as well as the US consulate in Jerusalem for Palestinian affairs.
However, Bidenx2019;s Israel policy is likely to be a continuation, not a reset x2013; an approach, some experts argue could sum up Bidenx2019;s upcoming Middle East policy in general.
xA0;















